Title: Clarissa, Volume 1 (of 9)

Author: Samuel Richardson

Produced by Julie C. Sparks




CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

Nine Volumes

Volume I.


     Comprehending
     The most Important Concerns of Private Life.
     And particularly shewing,
     The Distresses that may attend the Misconduct
     Both of Parents and Children,
     In Relation to Marriage.




PREFACE


The following History is given in a series of letters, written
Principally in a double yet separate correspondence;

Between two young ladies of virtue and honor, bearing an inviolable
friendship for each other, and writing not merely for amusement, but
upon the most interesting subjects; in which every private family, more
or less, may find itself concerned; and,

Between two gentlemen of free lives; one of them glorying in his
talents for stratagem and invention, and communicating to the other, in
confidence, all the secret purposes of an intriguing head and resolute
heart.

But here it will be proper to observe, for the sake of such as may
apprehend hurt to the morals of youth, from the more freely-written
letters, that the gentlemen, though professed libertines as to the
female sex, and making it one of their wicked maxims, to keep no faith
with any of the individuals of it, who are thrown into their power,
are not, however, either infidels or scoffers; nor yet such as think
themselves freed from the observance of those other moral duties which
bind man to man.

On the contrary, it will be found, in the progress of the work, that
they very often make such reflections upon each other, and each upon
himself and his own actions, as reasonable beings must make, who
disbelieve not a future state of rewards and punishments, and who one
day propose to reform--one of them actually reforming, and by that means
giving an opportunity to censure the freedoms which fall from the gayer
pen and lighter heart of the other.

And yet that other, although in unbosoming himself to a select friend,
he discovers wickedness enough to entitle him to general detestation,
preserves a decency, as well in his images as in his language, which
is not always to be found in the works of some of the most celebrated
modern writers, whose subjects and characters have less warranted the
liberties they have taken.

In the letters of the two young ladies, it is presumed, will be
found not only the highest exercise of a reasonable and practicable
friendship, between minds endowed with the noblest principles of
virtue and religion, but occasionally interspersed, such delicacy of
sentiments, particularly with regard to the other sex; such instances
of impartiality, each freely, as a fundamental principle of their
friendship, blaming, praising, and setting right the other, as are
strongly to be recommended to the observation of the younger part (more
specially) of female readers.

The principle of these two young ladies is proposed as an exemplar to
her sex. Nor is it any objection to her being so, that she is not in
all respects a perfect character. It was not only natural, but it was
necessary, that she should have some faults, were it only to show the
reader how laudably she could mistrust and blame herself, and carry to
her own heart, divested of self-partiality, the censure which arose from
her own convictions, and that even to the acquittal of those, because
revered characters, whom no one else would acquit, and to whose much
greater faults her errors were owing, and not to a weak or reproachable
heart. As far as it is consistent with human frailty, and as far as she
could be perfect, considering the people she had to deal with, and those
with whom she was inseparably connected, she is perfect. To have been
impeccable, must have left nothing for the Divine Grace and a purified
state to do, and carried our idea of her from woman to angel. As such is
she often esteemed by the man whose heart was so corrupt that he could
hardly believe human nature capable of the purity, which, on every trial
or temptation, shone out in her's [sic].

Besides the four principal person, several others are introduced, whose
letters are characteristic: and it is presumed that there will be found
in some of them, but more especially in those of the chief character
among the men, and the second character among the women, such strokes of
gayety, fancy, and humour, as will entertain and divert, and at the same
time both warn and instruct.

All the letters are written while the hearts of the writers must be
supposed to be wholly engaged in their subjects (the events at the time
generally dubious): so that they abound not only in critical situations,
but with what may be called instantaneous descriptions and reflections
(proper to be brought home to the breast of the youthful reader;) as
also with affecting conversations; many of them written in the dialogue
or dramatic way.

'Much more lively and affecting,' says one of the principal character,
'must be the style of those who write in the height of a present
distress; the mind tortured by the pangs of uncertainty (the events then
hidden in the womb of fate;) than the dry, narrative, unanimated style
of a person relating difficulties and danger surmounted, can be; the
relater perfectly at ease; and if himself unmoved by his own story, not
likely greatly to affect the reader.'

What will be found to be more particularly aimed at in the following
work is--to warn the inconsiderate and thoughtless of the one sex,
against the base arts and designs of specious contrivers of the
other--to caution parents against the undue exercise of their natural
authority over their children in the great article of marriage--to warn
children against preferring a man of pleasure to a man of probity upon
that dangerous but too-commonly-received notion, that a reformed rake
makes the best husband--but above all, to investigate the highest and
most important doctrines not only of morality, but of Christianity, by
showing them thrown into action in the conduct of the worthy characters;
while the unworthy, who set those doctrines at defiance, are condignly,
and, as may be said, consequentially punished.

From what has been said, considerate readers will not enter upon the
perusal of the piece before them as if it were designed only to divert
and amuse. It will probably be thought tedious to all such as dip into
it, expecting a light novel, or transitory romance; and look upon story
in it (interesting as that is generally allowed to be) as its sole end,
rather than as a vehicle to the instruction.

Different persons, as might be expected, have been of different
opinions, in relation to the conduct of the Heroine in particular
situations; and several worthy persons have objected to the general
catastrophe, and other parts of the history. Whatever is thought
material of these shall be taken notice of by way of Postscript, at the
conclusion of the History; for this work being addressed to the public
as a history of life and manners, those parts of it which are
proposed to carry with them the force of an example, ought to be as
unobjectionable as is consistent with the design of the whole, and with
human nature.




NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL PERSONS


  MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, a young lady of great beauty and merit.
  ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ. her admirer.
  JAMES HARLOWE, ESQ. father of Clarissa.
  MRS. HARLOWE, his lady.
  JAMES HARLOWE, their only son.
  ARABELLA, their elder daughter.
  JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. elder brother of James Harlowe, sen.
  ANTONY HARLOWE, third brother.
  ROGER SOLMES, ESQ. an admirer of Clarissa, favoured by her friends.
  MRS. HERVEY, half-sister of Mrs. Harlowe.
  MISS DOLLY HERVEY, her daughter.
  MRS. JUDITH NORTON, a woman of great piety and discretion, who had a
  principal share in the education of Clarissa.
  COL. WM. MORDEN, a near relation of the Harlowes.
  MISS HOWE, the most intimate friend, companion, and correspondent of
  Clarissa.
  MRS. HOWE, her mother.
  CHARLES HICKMAN, ESQ. an admirer of Miss Howe.
  LORD M., uncle to Mr. Lovelace.
  LADY SARAH SADLEIR, LADY BETTY LAWRANCE, half-sisters of Lord M.
  MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE, MISS PATTY MONTAGUE, nieces of the same
  nobleman.
  DR. LEWEN, a worthy divine.
  MR. ELIAS BRAND, a pedantic young clergyman.
  DR. H. a humane physician.
  MR. GODDARD, an honest and skilful apothecary.
  JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. Mr. Lovelace's principal intimate and confidant.
  RICHARD MOWBRAY, THOMAS DOLEMAN, JAMES TOURVILLE, THOMAS BELTON,
  ESQRS. libertine friends of Mr. Lovelace.
  MRS. MOORE, a widow, keeping a lodging-house at Hampstead.
  MISS RAWLINS, a notable young gentlewoman there.
  MRS. BEVIS, a lively young widow of the same place.
  MRS. SINCLAIR, the pretended name of a private brothel-keeper in
  London.
  CAPTAIN TOMLINSON, the assumed name of a vile pander to the
  debaucheries of Mr. Lovelace.
  SALLY MARTIN, POLLY HORTON, assistants of, and partners with, the
  infamous Sinclair.
  DORCAS WYKES, an artful servant at the vile house.





LETTERS OF VOLUME I


LETTER I. Miss Howe to Miss Clarissa Harlowe.--Desires from her the
particulars of the rencounter between Mr. Lovelace and her brother; and
of the usage she receives upon it: also the whole of her story from the
time Lovelace was introduced as a suitor to her sister Arabella. Admires
her great qualities, and glories in the friendship between them.

LETTER II. III. IV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Gives the requested
particulars. Together with the grounds of her brother's and sister's
ill-will to her; and of the animosity between her brother and
Lovelace.--Her mother connives at the private correspondence between
her and Lovelace, for the sake of preventing greater evils. Character
of Lovelace, from an enemy.--Copy of the preamble to her grandfather's
will.

LETTER V. From the same.--Her father, mother, brother, briefly
characterized. Her brother's consequence in the family. Wishes Miss Howe
had encouraged her brother's address. Endeavors to find excuses for her
father's ill temper, and for her mother's passiveness.

LETTER VI. From the same.--Mr. Symmes, Mr. Mullins, Mr. Wyerley, in
return, proposed to her, in malice to Lovelace; and, on their being
rejected, Mr. Solmes. Leave given her to visit Miss Howe for a few days.
Her brother's insolent behaviour upon it.

LETTER VII. From the same.--The harsh reception she meets with on her
return from Miss Howe. Solmes's first visit.

LETTER VIII. From the same.--All her family determined in Solmes's
favour. Her aversion to him. She rejects him, and is forbid going to
church, visiting, receiving visits, or writing to any body out of the
house.

LETTER IX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her expedient to carry on a private
correspondence with Miss Howe. Regrets the necessity she is laid under
to take such a clandestine step.

LETTER X. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Inveighs against the Harlowe family
for proposing such a man as Solmes. Characterizes them. Is jealous
of Antony Harlowe's visits to her mother. Rallies her friend on her
supposed regard to Lovelace.

LETTER XI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Is nettled and alarmed at her
raillery. Her reasons for not giving way to a passion for Lovelace.

LETTER XII. Miss Howe in reply.--Continues her raillery. Gives
Lovelace's character from Mrs. Fortescue.

LETTER XIII. XIV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--The views of her family in
favouring the address of Solmes. Her brother's and sister's triumph upon
the difficulties into which they have plunged her.

LETTER XV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--She accounts for Arabella's malice.
Blames her for having given up the power over the estate left her by her
grandfather.

LETTER XVI. XVII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Offends her father by her
behaviour to Solmes in his presence. Tender conversation between her
mother and her.--Offers to give up all thoughts of Lovelace, if she may
be freed from Solmes's address. Substance of one of Lovelace's letters,
of her answer, and of his reply. Makes a proposal. Her mother goes down
with it.

LETTER XVIII. From the same.--The proposal rejected. Her mother affects
severity to her. Another interesting conversation between them.

LETTER XIX. From the same.--Her dutiful motives for putting her estate
into her father's power. Why she thinks she ought not to have Solmes.
Afflicted on her mother's account.

LETTER XX. XXI. From the same.--Another conference with her mother, who
leaves her in anger.--She goes down to beg her favour. Solmes comes in.
She offers to withdraw; but is forbid. What follows upon it.

LETTER XXII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Substance of a letter from
Lovelace. She desires leave to go to church. Is referred to her brother,
and insultingly refused by him. Her letter to him. His answer.

LETTER XXIII. XXIV. XXV. From the same.--Her faithful Hannah
disgracefully dismissed. Betty Barnes, her sister's maid, set over her.
A letter from her brother forbidding her to appear in the presence of
any of her relations without leave. Her answer. Writes to her mother.
Her mother's answer. Writes to her father. His answer.

LETTER XXVI. From the same.--Is desirous to know the opinion Lord M.'s
family have of her. Substance of a letter from Lovelace, resenting the
indignities he receives from her relations. She freely acquaints him
that he has nothing to expect from her contrary to her duty. Insists
that his next letter shall be his last.

LETTER XXVII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Advises her to resume her estate.
Her satirical description of Solmes. Rallies her on her curiosity to
know what opinion Lord M. and his family have of her. Ascribes to the
difference in each of their tempers their mutual love. Gives particulars
of a conversation between her mother and her on Clarissa's case.
Reflects on the Harlowe family, and particularly on Mrs. Harlowe, for
her passiveness.

LETTER XXVIII. Clarissa. In answer.--Chides her for the liberties she
takes with her relations. Particularly defends her mother. Chides her
also for her lively airs to her own mother. Desires her to treat her
freely; but wishes not that she should impute love to her; and why.

LETTER XXIX. From the same.--Her expostulatory letter to her brother and
sister. Their answers.

LETTER XXX. From the same.--Exceedingly angry with Lovelace, on his
coming to their church. Reflections on pride, &c.

LETTER XXXI. Mr. Lovelace to John Belford, Esq.--Pride, revenge, love,
ambition, or a desire of conquest, his avowedly predominant passions.
His early vow to ruin as many of the fair sex as he can get into his
power. His pretences for it. Breathes revenge against the Harlowe
family. Glories in his contrivances. Is passionately in love with
Clarissa. His high notions of her beauty and merit. Yet is incensed
against her for preferring her own relations to him. Clears her,
however, of intentional pride, scorn, haughtiness, or want of
sensibility. What a triumph over the sex, and over her whole family, if
he can carry off a lady so watchful and so prudent! Is resolved, if he
cannot have the sister, to carry off the brother. Libertine as he is,
can have no thoughts of any other woman but Clarissa. Warns Belford,
Mowbray, Tourville, and Belton, to hold themselves in readiness to
obey his summons, on the likelihood there is of room for what he calls
glorious mischief.

LETTER XXXII. XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Copies of her letters to
her two uncles; and of their characteristic answer.--Her expostulatory
letter to Solmes. His answer.--An insolent letter from her brother, on
her writing to Solmes.

LETTER XXXIV. Lovelace to Belford.--He directs him to come down to him.
For what end. Description of the poor inn he puts up at in disguise; and
of the innocent daughter there, whom he calls his Rosebud. He resolves
to spare her. Pride and policy his motives, and not principle. Ingenuous
reflections on his own vicious disposition. He had been a rogue, he
says, had he been a plough-boy. Resolves on an act of generosity for
his Rosebud, by way of atonement, as he calls it, for some of his bad
actions; and for other reasons which appear in the sequel.

LETTER XXXV. From the same.--His artful contrivances and dealings with
Joseph Leman. His revenge and his love uppermost by turns. If the latter
succeeds not, he vows that the Harlowes shall feel the former, although
for it he become an exile from his country forever. He will throw
himself into Clarissa's presence in the woodhouse. If he thought he had
no prospect of her favour, he would attempt to carry her off: that, he
says, would be a rape worthy of a Jupiter. The arts he is resolved to
practise when he sees her, in order to engage her future reliance upon
his honour.

LETTER XXXVI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Lovelace, in disguise, surprises
her in the woodhouse. Her terrors on first seeing him. He greatly
engages her confidence (as he had designed) by his respectful behaviour.

LETTER XXXVII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--After rallying her on her not
readily owning the passion which she supposes she has for Lovelace, she
desires to know how far she thinks him eligible for his best qualities,
how far rejectable for his worst.

LETTER XXXVIII. XXXIX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--She disclaims tyranny to
a man who respects her. Her unhappy situation to be considered, in
which the imputed love is held by her parents to be an undutiful, and
therefore a criminal passion, and where the supposed object of it is a
man of faulty morals. Is interrupted by a visit from Mrs. Norton, who
is sent up to her to influence her in Solmes's favour. An affecting
conversation between them. What passes upon it, and after it.

LETTER XL. From the same.--Resumes the requested subject. What sort of
man she could have preferred to Mr. Lovelace. Arguments she has used to
herself in his favour, and in his disfavour. Frankly owns that were he
now a moral man, she would prefer him to all the men she ever saw. Yet
is persuaded, that she could freely give up the one man to get rid of
the other, as she had offered to her friends. Her delicacy affected
by Miss Howe's raillery; and why. Gives her opinion of the force which
figure or person may be allowed to have upon her sex.

LETTER XLI. From the same.--A letter from her mother (with patterns of
rich silks) in which she entreats her to comply with all their wishes.
What ought to be the principal view of a good wife in adorning her
person. Her distress. Begs leave to wait upon her mother alone. Her
father's angry letter, ordering her to prepare for her wedding-day.
Solmes requests to see her. She refuses. All in tumults below upon
it. Her brother and her sister desire that she may be left to their
management.

LETTER XLII. From the same.--A very warm dialogue between her sister
and her. Her sister's envy, unnatural behaviour, and violence. Clarissa
sends down proposals in writing to her friends, and a letter to her
brother. His insolent answer; in which he tells her, that her proposal
will be considered in full assembly next morning; but that, if they
shall be complied with, he will retire to Scotland, and never more
return to Harlowe-place.

LETTER XLIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Hardly doubts but her proposals
will be accepted. Paints to herself, as her relations arrive one by one,
what their deliberations, and the result of them will be, when they are
all assembled. Her proposals rejected. Her sister's cruel insults on the
occasion produce another warm dialogue between them. Her sister leaves
her in a fury. She is greatly disturbed at the contents of a letter from
Lovelace.

LETTER XLIV. From the same.--Her aunt Hervey, accompanied by her sister,
makes her a visit. Farther insults from her sister. Her aunt's fruitless
pleas in Solmes's favour.





THE HISTORY OF CLARISSA HARLOWE




LETTER I

MISS ANNA HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE JAN 10.


I am extremely concerned, my dearest friend, for the disturbances that
have happened in your family. I know how it must hurt you to become
the subject of the public talk: and yet, upon an occasion so generally
known, it is impossible but that whatever relates to a young lady, whose
distinguished merits have made her the public care, should engage every
body's attention. I long to have the particulars from yourself; and of
the usage I am told you receive upon an accident you could not help; and
in which, as far as I can learn, the sufferer was the aggressor.

Mr. Diggs, the surgeon, whom I sent for at the first hearing of the
rencounter, to inquire, for your sake, how your brother was, told me,
that there was no danger from the wound, if there were none from the
fever; which it seems has been increased by the perturbation of his
spirits.

Mr. Wyerley drank tea with us yesterday; and though he is far from being
partial to Mr. Lovelace, as it may well be supposed, yet both he and Mr.
Symmes blame your family for the treatment they gave him when he went
in person to inquire after your brother's health, and to express his
concern for what had happened.

They say, that Mr. Lovelace could not avoid drawing his sword: and that
either your brother's unskilfulness or passion left him from the very
first pass entirely in his power.

This, I am told, was what Mr. Lovelace said upon it; retreating as he
spoke: 'Have a care, Mr. Harlowe--your violence puts you out of your
defence. You give me too much advantage. For your sister's sake, I will
pass by every thing:--if--'

But this the more provoked his rashness, to lay himself open to the
advantage of his adversary--who, after a slight wound given him in the
arm, took away his sword.

There are people who love not your brother, because of his natural
imperiousness and fierce and uncontroulable temper: these say, that
the young gentleman's passion was abated on seeing his blood gush
plentifully down his arm; and that he received the generous offices of
his adversary (who helped him off with his coat and waistcoat, and bound
up his arm, till the surgeon could come,) with such patience, as was far
from making a visit afterwards from that adversary, to inquire after his
health, appear either insulting or improper.

Be this as it may, every body pities you. So steady, so uniform in your
conduct: so desirous, as you always said, of sliding through life to the
end of it unnoted; and, as I may add, not wishing to be observed
even for your silent benevolence; sufficiently happy in the noble
consciousness which attends it: Rather useful than glaring, your
deserved motto; though now, to your regret, pushed into blaze, as I may
say: and yet blamed at home for the faults of others--how must such a
virtue suffer on every hand!--yet it must be allowed, that your present
trial is but proportioned to your prudence.

As all your friends without doors are apprehensive that some other
unhappy event may result from so violent a contention, in which it seems
the families on both sides are now engaged, I must desire you to enable
me, on the authority of your own information, to do you occasional
justice.

My mother, and all of us, like the rest of the world, talk of nobody but
you on this occasion, and of the consequences which may follow from the
resentments of a man of Mr. Lovelace's spirit; who, as he gives out, has
been treated with high indignity by your uncles. My mother will have
it, that you cannot now, with any decency, either see him, or correspond
with him. She is a good deal prepossessed by your uncle Antony; who
occasionally calls upon us, as you know; and, on this rencounter, has
represented to her the crime which it would be in a sister to encourage
a man who is to wade into her favour (this was his expression) through
the blood of her brother.

Write to me therefore, my dear, the whole of your story from the
time that Mr. Lovelace was first introduced into your family; and
particularly an account of all that passed between him and your sister;
about which there are different reports; some people scrupling not to
insinuate that the younger sister has stolen a lover from the elder: and
pray write in so full a manner as may satisfy those who know not so much
of your affairs as I do. If anything unhappy should fall out from the
violence of such spirits as you have to deal with, your account of all
things previous to it will be your best justification.

You see what you draw upon yourself by excelling all your sex. Every
individual of it who knows you, or has heard of you, seems to think
you answerable to her for your conduct in points so very delicate and
concerning.

Every eye, in short, is upon you with the expectation of an example. I
wish to heaven you were at liberty to pursue your own methods: all
would then, I dare say, be easy, and honourably ended. But I dread your
directors and directresses; for your mother, admirably well qualified
as she is to lead, must submit to be led. Your sister and brother will
certainly put you out of your course.

But this is a point you will not permit me to expatiate upon: pardon me
therefore, and I have done.--Yet, why should I say, pardon me? when your
concerns are my concerns? when your honour is my honour? when I love
you, as never woman loved another? and when you have allowed of that
concern and of that love; and have for years, which in persons so young
may be called many, ranked in the first class of your friends,

Your ever grateful and affectionate, ANNA HOWE.


Will you oblige me with a copy of the preamble to the clauses in your
grandfather's will in your favour; and allow me to send it to my aunt
Harman?--She is very desirous to see it. Yet your character has so
charmed her, that, though a stranger to you personally, she assents to
the preference given you in that will, before she knows the testator's
reasons for giving you that preference.




LETTER II

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE HARLOWE-PLACE, JAN. 13.


How you oppress me, my dearest friend, with your politeness! I cannot
doubt your sincerity; but you should take care, that you give me not
reason from your kind partiality to call in question your judgment. You
do not distinguish that I take many admirable hints from you, and have
the art to pass them upon you for my own: for in all you do, in all you
say, nay, in your very looks (so animated!) you give lessons to one
who loves you and observes you as I love you and observe you, without
knowing that you do--So pray, my dear, be more sparing of your praise
for the future, lest after this confession we should suspect that you
secretly intend to praise yourself, while you would be thought only to
commend another.

Our family has indeed been strangely discomposed.--Discomposed!--It has
been in tumults, ever since the unhappy transaction; and I have borne
all the blame; yet should have had too much concern from myself, had I
been more justly spared by every one else.

For, whether it be owing to a faulty impatience, having been too
indulgently treated to be inured to blame, or to the regret I have to
hear those censured on my account, whom it is my duty to vindicate; I
have sometimes wished, that it had pleased God to have taken me in my
last fever, when I had every body's love and good opinion; but oftener
that I had never been distinguished by my grandfather as I was: since
that distinction has estranged from me my brother's and sister's
affections; at least, has raised a jealousy with regard to the
apprehended favour of my two uncles, that now-and-then overshadows their
love.

My brother being happily recovered of his fever, and his wound in a
hopeful way, although he has not yet ventured abroad, I will be as
particular as you desire in the little history you demand of me. But
heaven forbid that any thing should ever happen which may require it to
be produced for the purpose you mention!

I will begin, as you command, with Mr. Lovelace's address to my sister;
and be as brief as possible. I will recite facts only; and leave you
to judge of the truth of the report raised, that the younger sister has
robbed the elder.

It was in pursuance of a conference between Lord M. and my uncle Antony,
that Mr. Lovelace [my father and mother not forbidding] paid his respect
to my sister Arabella. My brother was then in Scotland, busying himself
in viewing the condition of the considerable estate which was left him
there by his generous godmother, together with one as considerable in
Yorkshire. I was also absent at my Dairy-house, as it is called,* busied
in the accounts relating to the estate which my grandfather had
the goodness to devise to me; and which once a year was left to my
inspection, although I have given the whole into my father's power.


     * Her grandfather, in order to invite her to him as often as
     her other friends would spare her, indulged her in erecting
     and fitting up a dairy-house in her own taste. When
     finished, it was so much admired for its elegant simplicity
     and convenience, that the whole seat (before, of old time,
     from its situation, called The Grove) was generally known by
     the name of The Dairy-house. Her grandfather in particular
     was fond of having it so called.


My sister made me a visit there the day after Mr. Lovelace had been
introduced; and seemed highly pleased with the gentleman. His birth, his
fortune in possession, a clear 2000L. a year, as Lord M. had assured
my uncle; presumptive heir to that nobleman's large estate: his great
expectations from Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrence; who with
his uncle interested themselves very warmly (he being the last of his
line) to see him married.

'So handsome a man!--O her beloved Clary!' (for then she was ready
to love me dearly, from the overflowings of her good humour on his
account!) 'He was but too handsome a man for her!--Were she but as
amiable as somebody, there would be a probability of holding his
affections!--For he was wild, she heard; very wild, very gay; loved
intrigue--but he was young; a man of sense: would see his error, could
she but have patience with his faults, if his faults were not cured by
marriage!'

Thus she ran on; and then wanted me 'to see the charming man,' as she
called him.--Again concerned, 'that she was not handsome enough for
him;' with, 'a sad thing, that the man should have the advantage of
the woman in that particular!'--But then, stepping to the glass, she
complimented herself, 'That she was very well: that there were many
women deemed passable who were inferior to herself: that she was always
thought comely; and comeliness, let her tell me, having not so much
to lose as beauty had, would hold, when that would evaporate or fly
off:--nay, for that matter,' [and again she turned to the glass] 'her
features were not irregular; her eyes not at all amiss.' And I remember
they were more than usually brilliant at that time.--'Nothing, in short,
to be found fault with, though nothing very engaging she doubted--was
there, Clary.'

Excuse me, my dear, I never was thus particular before; no, not to you.
Nor would I now have written thus freely of a sister, but that she makes
a merit to my brother of disowning that she ever liked him; as I shall
mention hereafter: and then you will always have me give you minute
descriptions, nor suffer me to pass by the air and manner in which
things are spoken that are to be taken notice of; rightly observing,
that air and manner often express more than the accompanying words.

I congratulated her upon her prospects. She received my compliments with
a great deal of self-complacency.

She liked the gentleman still more at his next visit; and yet he made no
particular address to her, although an opportunity was given him for
it. This was wondered at, as my uncle has introduced him into our family
declaredly as a visitor to my sister. But as we are ever ready to make
excuses when in good humour with ourselves for the perhaps not unwilful
slights of those whose approbation we wish to engage; so my sister found
out a reason much to Mr. Lovelace's advantage for his not improving
the opportunity that was given him.--It was bashfulness, truly, in him.
[Bashfulness in Mr. Lovelace, my dear!]--Indeed, gay and lively as he
is, he has not the look of an impudent man. But, I fancy, it is many,
many years ago since he was bashful.

Thus, however, could my sister make it out--'Upon her word, she believed
Mr. Lovelace deserved not the bad character he had as to women.--He was
really, to her thinking, a modest man. He would have spoken out, she
believed; but once or twice as he seemed to intend to do so, he was
under so agreeable a confusion! Such a profound respect he seemed to
shew her! A perfect reverence, she thought: she loved dearly that a man
in courtship should shew a reverence to his mistress'--So indeed we all
do, I believe: and with reason; since, if I may judge from what I
have seen in many families, there is little enough of it shewn
afterwards.--And she told my aunt Hervey, that she would be a little
less upon the reserve next time he came: 'She was not one of those
flirts, not she, who would give pain to a person that deserved to be
well-treated; and the more pain for the greatness of his value for
her.'--I wish she had not somebody whom I love in her eye.

In his third visit, Bella governed herself by this kind and considerate
principle: so that, according to her own account of the matter, the man
might have spoken out.--But he was still bashful: he was not able to
overcome this unseasonable reverence. So this visit went off as the
former.

But now she began to be dissatisfied with him. She compared his general
character with this his particular behaviour to her; and having never
been courted before, owned herself puzzled how to deal with so odd a
lover. 'What did the man mean, she wondered? Had not her uncle brought
him declaredly as a suitor to her?--It could not be bashfulness (now she
thought of it) since he might have opened his mind to her uncle, if he
wanted courage to speak directly to her.--Not that she cared much for
the man neither: but it was right, surely, that a woman should be put
out of doubt early as to a man's intentions in such a case as this, from
his own mouth.--But, truly, she had begun to think, that he was more
solicitous to cultivate her mamma's good opinion, than hers!--Every
body, she owned, admired her mother's conversation; but he was mistaken
if he thought respect to her mother only would do with her. And
then, for his own sake, surely he should put it into her power to
be complaisant to him, if he gave her reason to approve of him. This
distant behaviour, she must take upon herself to say, was the more
extraordinary, as he continued his visits, and declared himself
extremely desirous to cultivate a friendship with the whole family; and
as he could have no doubt about her sense, if she might take upon her to
join her own with the general opinion; he having taken great notice of,
and admired many of her good things as they fell from her lips. Reserves
were painful, she must needs say, to open and free spirits, like hers:
and yet she must tell my aunt,' (to whom all this was directed) 'that
she should never forget what she owed to her sex, and to herself, were
Mr. Lovelace as unexceptionable in his morals as in his figure, and were
he to urge his suit ever so warmly.'

I was not of her council. I was still absent. And it was agreed upon
between my aunt Hervey and her, that she was to be quite solemn and shy
in his next visit, if there were not a peculiarity in his address to
her.

But my sister it seems had not considered the matter well. This was not
the way, as it proved, to be taken for matters of mere omission, with a
man of Mr. Lovelace's penetration. Nor with any man; since if love has
not taken root deep enough to cause it to shoot out into declaration, if
an opportunity be fairly given for it, there is little room to expect,
that the blighting winds of anger or resentment will bring it forward.
Then my poor sister is not naturally good-humoured. This is too
well-known a truth for me to endeavor to conceal it, especially from
you. She must therefore, I doubt, have appeared to great disadvantages
when she aimed to be worse tempered than ordinary.

How they managed it in their next conversation I know not. One would be
tempted to think by the issue, that Mr. Lovelace was ungenerous enough
to seek the occasion given,* and to improve it. Yet he thought fit to
put the question too:--But, she says, it was not till, by some means
or other (she knew not how) he had wrought her up to such a pitch of
displeasure with him, that it was impossible for her to recover herself
at the instant. Nevertheless he re-urged his question, as expecting
a definitive answer, without waiting for the return of her temper,
or endeavouring to mollify her; so that she was under a necessity of
persisting in her denial: yet gave him reason to think she did not
dislike his address, only the manner of it; his court being rather made
to her mother than to herself, as if he was sure of her consent at any
time.


     * See Mr. Lovelace's Letter, No. XXXI, in which he briefly
     accounts for his conduct in this affair.


A good encouraging denial, I must own: as was the rest of her plea; to
wit, 'A disinclination to change her state. Exceedingly happy as she
was: she never could be happier!' And such-like consenting negatives,
as I may call them, and yet not intend a reflection upon my sister: for
what can any young creature in the like circumstances say, when she is
not sure but a too-ready consent may subject her to the slights of a sex
that generally values a blessing either more or less as it is obtained
with difficulty or ease? Miss Biddulph's answer to a copy of verse from
a gentleman, reproaching our sex as acting in disguise, is not a bad
one, although you may perhaps think it too acknowledging for the female
character.

 Ungen'rous Sex!--To scorn us if we're kind;
   And yet upbraid us if we seem severe!
 Do you, t' encourage us to tell our mind,
   Yourselves put off disguise, and be sincere.
 You talk of coquetry!--Your own false hearts
 Compel our sex to act dissembling parts.

Here I am obliged to lay down my pen. I will soon resume it.




LETTER III

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE JAN. 13, 14.


And thus, as Mr. Lovelace thought fit to take it, had he his answer from
my sister. It was with very great regret, as he pretended, [I doubt
the man is an hypocrite, my dear] that he acquiesced in it. 'So much
determinedness; such a noble firmness in my sister, that there was no
hope of prevailing upon her to alter sentiments she had adopted on full
consideration.' He sighed, as Bella told us, when he took his leave of
her: 'Profoundly sighed; grasped her hand, and kissed it with such an
ardour--Withdrew with such an air of solemn respect--She could almost
find it in her heart, although he had vexed her, to pity him.' A good
intentional preparative to love, this pity; since, at the time, she
little thought that he would not renew his offer.

He waited on my mother after he had taken leave of Bella, and reported
his ill success in so respectful a manner, as well with regard to my
sister, as to the whole family, and with so much concern that he was
not accepted as a relation to it, that it left upon them all (my brother
being then, as I have said, in Scotland) impressions in his favour, and
a belief that this matter would certainly be brought on again. But Mr.
Lovelace going up directly to town, where he staid a whole fortnight,
and meeting there with my uncle Antony, to whom he regretted his niece's
cruel resolution not to change her state; it was seen that there was a
total end of the affair.

My sister was not wanting to herself on this occasion. She made a
virtue of necessity; and the man was quite another man with her. 'A vain
creature! Too well knowing his advantages: yet those not what she had
conceived them to be!--Cool and warm by fits and starts; an ague-like
lover. A steady man, a man of virtue, a man of morals, was worth a
thousand of such gay flutterers. Her sister Clary might think it worth
her while perhaps to try to engage such a man: she had patience: she
was mistress of persuasion: and indeed, to do the girl justice, had
something of a person: But as for her, she would not have a man of whose
heart she could not be sure for one moment; no, not for the world: and
most sincerely glad was she that she had rejected him.'

But when Mr. Lovelace returned into the country, he thought fit to visit
my father and mother; hoping, as he told them, that, however unhappy
he had been in the rejection of the wished-for alliance, he might be
allowed to keep up an acquaintance and friendship with a family which he
should always respect. And then unhappily, as I may say, was I at home
and present.

It was immediately observed, that his attention was fixed on me. My
sister, as soon as he was gone, in a spirit of bravery, seemed desirous
to promote his address, should it be tendered.

My aunt Hervey was there; and was pleased to say, we should make the
finest couple in England--if my sister had no objection.--No, indeed!
with a haughty toss, was my sister's reply--it would be strange if she
had, after the denial she had given him upon full deliberation.

My mother declared, that her only dislike of his alliance with either
daughter, was on account of his reputed faulty morals.

My uncle Harlowe, that his daughter Clary, as he delighted to call me
from childhood, would reform him if any woman in the world could.

My uncle Antony gave his approbation in high terms: but referred, as my
aunt had done, to my sister.

She repeated her contempt of him; and declared, that, were there not
another man in England, she would not have him. She was ready, on the
contrary, she could assure them, to resign her pretensions under hand
and seal, if Miss Clary were taken with his tinsel, and if every one
else approved of his address to the girl.

My father indeed, after a long silence, being urged by my uncle Antony
to speak his mind, said, that he had a letter from his son, on his
hearing of Mr. Lovelace's visits to his daughter Arabella; which he had
not shewn to any body but my mother; that treaty being at an end when
he received it: that in this letter he expressed great dislike to an
alliance with Mr. Lovelace on the score of his immoralities: that he
knew, indeed, there was an old grudge between them; but that, being
desirous to prevent all occasions of disunion and animosity in his
family, he would suspend the declaration of his own mind till his son
arrived, and till he had heard his further objections: that he was the
more inclined to make his son this compliment, as Mr. Lovelace's general
character gave but too much ground for his son's dislike of him; adding,
that he had hear (so, he supposed, had every one,) that he was a very
extravagant man; that he had contracted debts in his travels: and
indeed, he was pleased to say, he had the air of a spendthrift.

These particulars I had partly from my aunt Hervey, and partly from my
sister; for I was called out as soon as the subject was entered upon.
When I returned, my uncle Antony asked me, how I should like Mr.
Lovelace? Every body saw, he was pleased to say, that I had made a
conquest.

I immediately answered, that I did not like him at all: he seemed to
have too good an opinion both on his person and parts, to have any
regard to his wife, let him marry whom he would.

My sister particularly was pleased with this answer, and confirmed it to
be just; with a compliment to my judgment.--For it was hers.

But the very next day Lord M. came to Harlowe-Place [I was then absent];
and in his nephew's name made a proposal in form; declaring, that it was
the ambition of all his family to be related to ours: and he hoped his
kinsman would not have such an answer on the part of the younger sister,
as he had on that of the elder.

In short, Mr. Lovelace's visits were admitted as those of a man who had
not deserved disrespect from our family; but as to his address to
me, with a reservation, as above, on my father's part, that he would
determine nothing without his son. My discretion as to the rest was
confided in: for still I had the same objections as to the man: nor
would I, when we were better acquainted, hear any thing but general talk
from him; giving him no opportunity of conversing with me in private.

He bore this with a resignation little expected from his natural temper,
which is generally reported to be quick and hasty; unused it seems
from childhood to check or controul. A case too common in considerable
families where there is an only son: and his mother never had any
other child. But, as I have heretofore told you, I could perceive,
notwithstanding this resignation, that he had so good an opinion of
himself, as not to doubt, that his person and accomplishments would
insensibly engage me: And could that be once done, he told my aunt
Hervey, he should hope, from so steady a temper, that his hold in my
affections would be durable: While my sister accounted for his patience
in another manner, which would perhaps have had more force if it had
come from a person less prejudiced: 'That the man was not fond of
marrying at all: that he might perhaps have half a score mistresses: and
that delay might be as convenient for his roving, as for my well-acted
indifference.' That was her kind expression.

Whatever was his motive for a patience so generally believed to be out
of his usual character, and where the object of his address was supposed
to be of fortune considerable enough to engage his warmest attention,
he certainly escaped many mortifications by it: for while my father
suspended his approbation till my brother's arrival, Mr. Lovelace
received from every one those civilities which were due to his birth:
and although we heard from time to time reports to his disadvantage with
regard to morals, yet could we not question him upon them without giving
him greater advantages in his own opinion than the situation he was in
with us would justify to prudence; since it was much more likely that
his address would not be allowed of, than that it would.

And thus was he admitted to converse with our family almost upon his own
terms; for while my friends saw nothing in his behaviour but what was
extremely respectful, and observed in him no violent importunity,
they seemed to have taken a great liking to his conversation: While I
considered him only as a common guest when he came; and thought myself
no more concerned in his visits, not at his entrance and departure, than
any other of the family.

But this indifference on my side was the means of procuring him one
very great advantage; since upon it was grounded that correspondence by
letters which succeeded;--and which, had it been to be begun when the
family animosity broke out, would never have been entered into on my
part. The occasion was this:

My uncle Hervey has a young gentleman intrusted to his care, whom he has
thoughts of sending abroad a year or two hence, to make the Grand Tour,
as it is called; and finding Mr. Lovelace could give a good account
of every thing necessary for a young traveller to observe upon such an
occasion, he desired him to write down a description of the courts and
countries he had visited, and what was most worthy of curiosity in them.

He consented, on condition that I would direct his subjects, as he
called it: and as every one had heard his manner of writing commended;
and thought his narratives might be agreeable amusements in winter
evenings; and that he could have no opportunity particularly to address
me directly in them, since they were to be read in full assembly before
they were given to the young gentleman, I made the less scruple to
write, and to make observations, and put questions for our further
information--Still the less perhaps as I love writing; and those who do,
are fond, you know, of occasions to use the pen: And then, having
ever one's consent, and my uncle Hervey's desire that I would write,
I thought that if I had been the only scrupulous person, it would have
shewn a particularity that a vain man might construe to his advantage;
and which my sister would not fail to animadvert upon.

You have seen some of these letters; and have been pleased with this
account of persons, places, and things; and we have both agreed, that he
was no common observer upon what he had seen.

My sister allowed that the man had a tolerable knack of writing and
describing: And my father, who had been abroad in his youth, said, that
his remarks were curious, and shewed him to be a person of reading,
judgment and taste.

Thus was a kind of correspondence begun between him and me, with general
approbation; while every one wondered at, and was pleased with, his
patient veneration of me; for so they called it. However, it was not
doubted but he would soon be more importunate, since his visits were
more frequent, and he acknowledged to my aunt Hervey a passion for me,
accompanied with an awe that he had never known before; to which he
attributed what he called his but seeming acquiescence with my father's
pleasure, and the distance I kept him at. And yet, my dear, this may be
his usual manner of behaviour to our sex; for had not my sister at first
all his reverence?

Mean time, my father, expecting his importunity, kept in readiness the
reports he had heard in his disfavour, to charge them upon him then, as
so many objections to address. And it was highly agreeable to me that he
did so: it would have been strange if it were not; since the person who
could reject Mr. Wyerley's address for the sake of his free opinions,
must have been inexcusable, had she not rejected another's for his freer
practices.

But I should own, that in the letters he sent me upon the general
subject, he more than once inclosed a particular one, declaring his
passionate regards for me, and complaining with fervour enough, of my
reserves. But of these I took not the least notice: for, as I had not
written to him at all, but upon a subject so general, I thought it was
but right to let what he wrote upon one so particular pass off as if I
had never seen it; and the rather, as I was not then at liberty (from
the approbation his letters met with) to break off the correspondence,
unless I had assigned the true reason for doing so. Besides, with all
his respectful assiduities, it was easy to observe, (if it had not been
his general character) that his temper is naturally haughty and violent;
and I had seen too much of that untractable spirit in my brother to like
it in one who hoped to be still more nearly related to me.

I had a little specimen of this temper of his upon the very occasion I
have mentioned: For after he had sent me a third particular letter with
the general one, he asked me the next time he came to Harlowe-Place,
if I had not received such a one from him?--I told him I should never
answer one so sent; and that I had waited for such an occasion as he had
now given me, to tell him so: I desired him therefore not to write again
on the subject; assuring him, that if he did, I would return both, and
never write another line to him.

You can't imagine how saucily the man looked; as if, in short, he was
disappointed that he had not made a more sensible impression upon me:
nor, when he recollected himself (as he did immediately), what a visible
struggle it cost him to change his haughty airs for more placid ones.
But I took no notice of either; for I thought it best to convince him,
by the coolness and indifference with which I repulsed his forward hopes
(at the same time intending to avoid the affectation of pride or
vanity) that he was not considerable enough in my eyes to make me take
over-ready offence at what he said, or at his haughty looks: in other
words, that I had not value enough for him to treat him with peculiarity
either by smiles or frowns. Indeed he had cunning enough to give me,
undesignedly, a piece of instruction which taught me this caution; for
he had said in conversation once, 'That if a man could not make a woman
in courtship own herself pleased with him, it was as much and oftentimes
more to his purpose to make her angry with him.'

I must break off here, but will continue the subject the very first
opportunity. Mean time, I am

Your most affectionate friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER IV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE JAN. 15.


Such, my dear, was the situation Mr. Lovelace and I were in when my
brother arrived from Scotland.

The moment Mr. Lovelace's visits were mentioned to him, he, without
either hesitation or apology, expressed his disapprobation of them. He
found great flaws in his character; and took the liberty to say in so
many words, that he wondered how it came into the heads of his uncles
to encourage such a man for either of his sisters: At the same time
returning his thanks to my father for declining his consent till he
arrived, in such a manner, I thought, as a superior would do, when he
commended an inferior for having well performed his duty in his absence.

He justified his avowed inveteracy by common fame, and by what he had
known of him at college; declaring, that he had ever hated him; ever
should hate him; and would never own him for a brother, or me for a
sister, if I married him.

That early antipathy I have heard accounted for in this manner:

Mr. Lovelace was always noted for his vivacity and courage; and no less,
it seems, for the swift and surprising progress he made in all parts of
literature: for diligence in his studies in the hours of study, he
had hardly his equal. This it seems was his general character at the
university; and it gained him many friends among the more learned; while
those who did not love him, feared him, by reason of the offence his
vivacity made him too ready to give, and of the courage he shewed in
supporting the offence when given; which procured him as many followers
as he pleased among the mischievous sort.--No very amiable character,
you'll say, upon the whole.

But my brother's temper was not more happy. His native haughtiness could
not bear a superiority so visible; and whom we fear more than love, we
are not far from hating: and having less command of his passions than
the other, he was evermore the subject of his perhaps indecent
ridicule: so that every body, either from love or fear, siding with his
antagonist, he had a most uneasy time of it while both continued in the
same college.--It was the less wonder therefore that a young man who is
not noted for the gentleness of his temper, should resume an antipathy
early begun, and so deeply rooted.

He found my sister, who waited but for the occasion, ready to join him
in his resentments against the man he hated. She utterly disclaimed
all manner of regard for him: 'Never liked him at all:--His estate was
certainly much incumbered: it was impossible it should be otherwise; so
entirely devoted as he was to his pleasures. He kept no house; had no
equipage: Nobody pretended that he wanted pride: the reason therefore
was easy to be guessed at.' And then did she boast of, and my brother
praised her for, refusing him: and both joined on all occasions to
depreciate him, and not seldom made the occasions; their displeasure
against him causing every subject to run into this, if it began not with
it.

I was not solicitous to vindicate him when I was not joined in their
reflection. I told them I did not value him enough to make a difference
in the family on his account: and as he was supposed to have given
much cause for their ill opinion of him, I thought he ought to take the
consequence of his own faults.

Now and then indeed, when I observed that their vehemence carried them
beyond all bounds of probability in their charges against him, I thought
it but justice to put in a word for him. But this only subjected me
to reproach, as having a prepossession in his favour which I would not
own.--So that, when I could not change the subject, I used to retire
either to my music, or to my closet.

Their behaviour to him, when they could not help seeing him, was very
cold and disobliging; but as yet not directly affrontive. For they were
in hopes of prevailing upon my father to forbid his visits. But as there
was nothing in his behaviour, that might warrant such a treatment of
a man of his birth and fortune, they succeeded not: And then they were
very earnest with me to forbid them. I asked, what authority I had to
take such a step in my father's house; and when my behaviour to him was
so distant, that he seemed to be as much the guest of any other person
of the family, themselves excepted, as mine?--In revenge, they told me,
that it was cunning management between us; and that we both understood
one another better than we pretended to do. And at last they gave such a
loose to their passions, all of a sudden* as I may say, that instead of
withdrawing, as they used to do when he came, they threw themselves in
his way purposely to affront him.


     * The reason of this their more openly shown animosity is
     given in Letter XIII.


Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brooked this: but nevertheless
contented himself to complain of it to me: in high terms, however,
telling me, that but for my sake my brother's treatment of him was not
to be borne.

I was sorry for the merit this gave him in his own opinion with me: and
the more, as some of the affronts he received were too flagrant to be
excused: But I told him, that I was determined not to fall out with
my brother, if I could help it, whatever faults he had: and since they
could not see one another with temper, should be glad that he would not
throw himself in my brother's way; and I was sure my brother would not
seek him.

He was very much nettled at this answer: But said, he must bear his
affronts if I would have it so. He had been accused himself of violence
in his temper; but he hoped to shew on this occasion that he had a
command of his passions which few young men, so highly provoked, would
be able to shew; and doubted not but it would be attributed to a proper
motive by a person of my generosity and penetration.

My brother had just before, with the approbation of my uncles, employed
a person related to a discharged bailiff or steward of Lord M. who had
had the management of some part of Mr. Lovelace's affairs (from which
he was also dismissed by him) to inquire into his debts, after his
companions, into his amours, and the like.

My aunt Hervey, in confidence, gave me the following particulars of what
the man had said of him.

'That he was a generous landlord: that he spared nothing for solid and
lasting improvements upon his estate; and that he looked into his own
affairs, and understood them: that he had been very expensive when
abroad; and contracted a large debt (for he made no secret of his
affairs); yet chose to limit himself to an annual sum, and to decline
equipage, in order to avoid being obliged to his uncle and aunts; from
whom he might have what money he pleased; but that he was very jealous
of their controul; had often quarrels with them; and treated them so
freely, that they were all afraid of him. However, that his estate was
never mortgaged, as my brother had heard it was; his credit was always
high; and the man believed, he was by this time near upon, if not quite,
clear of the world.

'He was a sad gentleman, he said, as to women:--If his tenants had
pretty daughters, they chose to keep them out of his sight. He believed
he kept no particular mistress; for he had heard newelty, that was the
man's word, was every thing with him. But for his uncle's and aunt's
teazings, the man fancied he would not think of marriage: he was never
known to be disguised with liquor; but was a great plotter, and a great
writer: That he lived a wild life in town, by what he had heard: had six
or seven companions as bad as himself; whom now and then he brought down
with him; and the country was always glad when they went up again. He
would have it, that although passionate, he was good-humoured; loved
as well to take a jest as to give one; and would rally himself upon
occasion the freest of any man he ever knew.'

This was his character from an enemy; for, as my aunt observed, every
thing the man said commendably of him came grudgingly, with a must needs
say--to do him justice, &c. while the contrary was delivered with a free
good-will. And this character, as a worse was expected, though this was
bad enough, not answering the end of inquiring after it, my brother and
sister were more apprehensive than before, that his address would be
encouraged, since the worst part of it was known, or supposed, when he
was first introduced to my sister.

But, with regard to myself, I must observe in his disfavour, that,
notwithstanding the merit he wanted to make with me for his patience
upon my brother's ill-treatment of him, I owed him no compliments
for trying to conciliate with him. Not that I believe it would have
signified any thing if he had made ever such court either to him or to
my sister: yet one might have expected from a man of his politeness, and
from his pretensions, you know, that he would have been willing to try.
Instead of which, he shewed such a contempt both of my brother and my
sister, especially my brother, as was construed into a defiance of
them. And for me to have hinted at an alteration in his behaviour to my
brother, was an advantage I knew he would have been proud of; and which
therefore I had no mind to give him. But I doubted not that having so
very little encouragement from any body, his pride would soon take fire,
and he would of himself discontinue his visits, or go to town; where,
till he came acquainted with our family, he used chiefly to reside: And
in this latter case he had no reason to expect, that I would receive,
much less answer, his Letters: the occasions which had led me to receive
any of his, being by this time over.

But my brother's antipathy would not permit him to wait for such an
event; and after several excesses, which Mr. Lovelace still returned
with contempt, and a haughtiness too much like that of the aggressor, my
brother took upon himself to fill up the door-way once when he came, as
if to oppose his entrance: And upon his asking for me, demanded, what
his business was with his sister?

The other, with a challenging air, as my brother says, told him, he
would answer a gentleman any question; but he wished that Mr. James
Harlowe, who had of late given himself high airs, would remember that he
was not now at college.

Just then the good Dr. Lewen, who frequently honours me with a visit of
conversation, as he is pleased to call it, and had parted with me in my
own parlour, came to the door: and hearing the words, interposed; both
having their hands upon their swords: and telling Mr. Lovelace where
I was, he burst by my brother, to come to me; leaving him chafing, he
said, like a hunted boar at bay.

This alarmed us all. My father was pleased to hint to Mr. Lovelace,
that he wished he would discontinue his visits for the peace-sake of the
family: And I, by his command, spoke a great deal plainer.

But Mr. Lovelace is a man not easily brought to give up his purpose,
especially in a point wherein he pretends his heart is so much engaged:
and no absolute prohibition having been given, things went on for a
little while as before: for I saw plainly, that to have denied myself to
his visits (which however I declined receiving as often as I could) was
to bring forward some desperate issue between the two; since the offence
so readily given on one side was brooked by the other only out of
consideration to me.

And thus did my brother's rashness lay me under an obligation where I
would least have owed it.

The intermediate proposals of Mr. Symmes and Mr. Mullins, both (in turn)
encouraged by my brother, induced him to be more patient for a while,
as nobody thought me over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's favour; for he hoped
that he should engage my father and uncles to approve of the one or the
other in opposition to the man he hated. But when he found that I
had interest enough to disengage myself from the addresses of those
gentlemen, as I had (before he went to Scotland, and before Mr. Lovelace
visited here) of Mr. Wyerley's, he then kept no measures: and first set
himself to upbraid me for supposed prepossession, which he treated as
if it were criminal; and then to insult Mr. Lovelace in person, at Mr.
Edward Symmes's, the brother of the other Symmes, two miles off; and
no good Dr. Lewen being there to interpose, the unhappy rencounter
followed. My brother was disarmed, as you have heard; and on being
brought home, and giving us ground to suppose he was much worse hurt
than he really was, and a fever ensuing, every one flamed out; and all
was laid at my door.

Mr. Lovelace for three days together sent twice each day to inquire
after my brother's health; and although he received rude and even
shocking returns, he thought fit on the fourth day to make in person
the same inquiries; and received still greater incivilities from my two
uncles, who happened to be both there. My father also was held by force
from going to him with his sword in his hand, although he had the gout
upon him.

I fainted away with terror, seeing every one so violent, and hearing Mr.
Lovelace swear that he would not depart till he had made my uncles ask
his pardon for the indignities he had received at their hands; a door
being held fast locked between him and them. My mother all the time
was praying and struggling to with-hold my father in the great parlour.
Meanwhile my sister, who had treated Mr. Lovelace with virulence, came
in to me, and insulted me as fast as I recovered. But when Mr. Lovelace
was told how ill I was, he departed; nevertheless vowing revenge.

He was ever a favourite with our domestics. His bounty to them, and
having always something facetious to say to each, had made them all of
his party: and on this occasion they privately blamed every body else,
and reported his calm and gentlemanly behaviour (till the provocations
given him ran very high) in such favourable terms, that those reports,
and my apprehensions of the consequence of this treatment, induced me to
read a letter he sent me that night; and, it being written in the most
respectful terms (offering to submit the whole to my decision, and to
govern himself entirely by my will) to answer it some days after.

To this unhappy necessity was owing our renewed correspondence, as I
may call it; yet I did not write till I had informed myself from Mr.
Symmes's brother, that he was really insulted into the act of drawing
his sword by my brother's repeatedly threatening (upon his excusing
himself out of regard to me) to brand me ir he did not; and, by all the
inquiry I could make, that he was again the sufferer from my uncles in a
more violent manner than I have related.

The same circumstances were related to my father and other relations by
Mr. Symmes; but they had gone too far in making themselves parties
to the quarrel either to retract or forgive; and I was forbidden to
correspond with him, or to be seen a moment in his company.

One thing however I can say, but that in confidence, because my mother
commanded me not to mention it:--That, expressing her apprehension of
the consequences of the indignities offered to Mr. Lovelace, she told
me, she would leave it to my prudence to do all I could to prevent the
impending mischief on one side.

I am obliged to break off. But I believe I have written enough to answer
very fully all that you have required of me. It is not for a child
to seek to clear her own character, or to justify her actions, at the
expense of the most revered ones: yet, as I know that the account of
all those further proceedings by which I may be affected, will be
interesting to so dear a friend (who will communicate to others no more
than what is fitting) I will continue to write, as I have opportunity,
as minutely as we are used to write to each other. Indeed I have
no delight, as I have often told you, equal to that which I take in
conversing with you by letter, when I cannot in person.

Mean time, I cannot help saying, that I am exceedingly concerned to
find, that I am become so much the public talk as you tell me I am. Your
kind, your precautionary regard for my fame, and the opportunity you
have given me to tell my own story previous to any new accident (which
heaven avert!) is so like the warm friend I have ever found in my dear
Miss Howe, that, with redoubled obligation, you bind me to be

Your ever grateful and affectionate, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


Copy of the requested Preamble to the clauses in her Grandfather's Will:
inclosed in the preceding Letter.


As the particular estate I have mentioned and described above, is
principally of my own raising: as my three sons have been uncommonly
prosperous; and are very rich: the eldest by means of the unexpected
benefits he reaps from his new found mines; the second, by what has, as
unexpectedly, fallen in to him on the deaths of several relations of
his present wife, the worthy daughter by both sides of very honourable
families; over and above the very large portion which he received with
her in marriage: my son Antony by his East-India traffic, and successful
voyages: as furthermore my grandson James will be sufficiently provided
for by his grandmother Lovell's kindness to him; who, having no near
relations, hath assured me, that she hath, as well by deed of gift as
by will, left him both her Scottish and English estates: for never
was there a family more prosperous in all its branches, blessed be God
therefore: and as my said son James will very probably make it up to
my grand-daughter Arabella; to whom I intend no disrespect; nor have
reason; for she is a very hopeful and dutiful child: and as my sons,
John and Antony, seem not inclined to a married life; so that my son
James is the only one who has children, or is likely to have any. For
all these reasons; and because my dearest and beloved grand-daughter
Clarissa hath been from her infancy a matchless young creature in her
duty to me, and admired by all who knew her, as a very extraordinary
child; I must therefore take the pleasure of considering her as my own
peculiar child; and this without intending offence; and I hope it
will not be taken as any, since my son James can bestow his favours
accordingly, and in greater proportion, upon his son James, and upon his
daughter Arabella.--

These, I say, are the reasons which move me to dispose of the
above-described estate in the precious child's favour; who is the
delight of my old age: and, I verily think, has contributed, by her
amiable duty and kind and tender regards, to prolong my life.

Wherefore it is my express will and commandment, and I enjoin my said
three sons, John, James, and Antony, and my grandson James, and my
grand-daughter Arabella, as they value my blessing, and will regard my
memory, and would wish their own last wills and desires to be fulfilled
by their survivors, that they will not impugn or contest the following
bequests and devises in favour of my said grand-daughter Clarissa,
although they should not be strictly conformable to law or to the forms
thereof; nor suffer them to be controverted or disputed on any pretence
whatsoever.

And in this confidence, &c. &c. &c.




LETTER V

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE JAN. 20


I have been hindered from prosecuting my intention. Neither nights nor
mornings have been my own. My mother has been very ill; and would have
no other nurse but me. I have not stirred from her bedside (for she kept
her bed); and two nights I had the honour of sharing it with her.

Her disorder was a very violet colic. The contentions of these fierce,
these masculine spirits, and the apprehension of mischiefs that may
arise from the increasing animosity which all here have against Mr.
Lovelace, and his too well known resenting and intrepid character, she
cannot bear. Then the foundations laid, as she dreads, for jealousy and
heart-burnings in her own family, late so happy and so united, afflict
exceedingly a gentle and sensible mind, which has from the beginning, on
all occasions, sacrificed its own inward satisfaction to outward peace.
My brother and sister, who used very often to jar, are now so entirely
one, and are so much together, (caballing was the word that dropt from
my mother's lips, as if at unawares,) that she is very fearful of the
consequences that may follow;--to my prejudice, perhaps, is her kind
concern; since she sees that they behave to me every hour with more and
more shyness and reserve: yet, would she but exert that authority which
the superiority of her fine talents gives her, all these family feuds
might perhaps be extinguished in their but yet beginnings; especially as
she may be assured that all fitting concessions shall be made by me,
not only as my brother and sister are my elders, but for the sake of so
excellent and so indulgent a mother.

For, if I may say to you, my dear, what I would not to any other person
living, it is my opinion, that had she been of a temper that would have
borne less, she would have had ten times less to bear, than she has had.
No commendation, you'll say, of the generosity of those spirits which
can turn to its own disquiet so much condescending goodness.

Upon my word I am sometimes tempted to think that we may make the world
allow for and respect us as we please, if we can but be sturdy in our
wills, and set out accordingly. It is but being the less beloved for it,
that's all: and if we have power to oblige those we have to do with, it
will not appear to us that we are. Our flatterers will tell us any thing
sooner than our faults, or what they know we do not like to hear.

Were there not truth in this observation, is it possible that my brother
and sister could make their very failings, their vehemences, of such
importance to all the family? 'How will my son, how will my nephew, take
this or that measure? What will he say to it? Let us consult him about
it;' are references always previous to every resolution taken by his
superiors, whose will ought to be his. Well may he expect to be treated
with this deference by every other person, when my father himself,
generally so absolute, constantly pays it to him; and the more since his
godmother's bounty has given independence to a spirit that was before
under too little restraint.--But whither may these reflections lead
me!--I know you do not love any of us but my mother and me; and, being
above all disguises, make me sensible that you do not oftener than I
wish.--Ought I then to add force to your dislikes of those whom I wish
you to like?--of my father especially; for he, alas! has some excuse
for his impatience of contradiction. He is not naturally an ill-tempered
man; and in his person and air, and in his conversation too, when not
under the torture of a gouty paroxysm, every body distinguishes the
gentleman born and educated.

Our sex perhaps must expect to bear a little--uncourtliness shall I call
it?--from the husband whom as the lover they let know the preference
their hearts gave him to all other men.--Say what they will of
generosity being a manly virtue; but upon my word, my dear, I have ever
yet observed, that it is not to be met with in that sex one time in ten
that it is to be found in ours.--But my father was soured by the cruel
distemper I have named; which seized him all at once in the very prime
of life, in so violent a manner as to take from the most active of
minds, as his was, all power of activity, and that in all appearance for
life.--It imprisoned, as I may say, his lively spirits in himself,
and turned the edge of them against his own peace; his extraordinary
prosperity adding to his impatiency. Those, I believe, who want the
fewest earthly blessings, most regret that they want any.

But my brother! What excuse can be made for his haughty and morose
temper? He is really, my dear, I am sorry to have occasion to say it, an
ill-temper'd young man; and treats my mother sometimes--Indeed he is not
dutiful.--But, possessing every thing, he has the vice of age, mingled
with the ambition of youth, and enjoys nothing--but his own haughtiness
and ill-temper, I was going to say.--Yet again am I adding force to your
dislikes of some of us.--Once, my dear, it was perhaps in your power to
have moulded him as you pleased.--Could you have been my sister!--Then
had I friend in a sister.--But no wonder that he does not love you now;
who could nip in the bud, and that with a disdain, let me say, too
much of kin to his haughtiness, a passion that would not have wanted
a fervour worthy of the object; and which possibly would have made him
worthy.

But no more of this. I will prosecute my former intention in my next;
which I will sit down to as soon as breakfast is over; dispatching this
by the messenger whom you have so kindly sent to inquire after us on my
silence. Mean time, I am,


Your most affectionate and obliged friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER VI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE HARLOWE-PLACE, JAN. 20.


I will now resume my narrative of proceedings here.--My brother being
in a good way, although you may be sure that his resentments are rather
heightened than abated by the galling disgrace he has received, my
friends (my father and uncles, however, if not my brother and sister)
begin to think that I have been treated unkindly. My mother been so good
as to tell me this since I sent away my last.

Nevertheless I believe they all think that I receive letters from Mr.
Lovelace. But Lord M. being inclined rather to support than to blame his
nephew, they seem to be so much afraid of Mr. Lovelace, that they do
not put it to me whether I do or not; conniving on the contrary, as it
should seem, at the only method left to allay the vehemence of a spirit
which they have so much provoked: For he still insists upon satisfaction
from my uncles; and this possibly (for he wants not art) as the best way
to be introduced again with some advantage into our family. And indeed
my aunt Hervey has put it to my mother, whether it were not best to
prevail upon my brother to take a turn to his Yorkshire estate (which he
was intending to do before) and to stay there till all is blown over.

But this is very far from being his intention: For he has already
began to hint again, that he shall never be easy or satisfied till I
am married; and, finding neither Mr. Symmes nor Mr. Mullins will be
accepted, has proposed Mr. Wyerley once more, on the score of his
great passion for me. This I have again rejected; and but yesterday he
mentioned one who has applied to him by letter, making high offers. This
is Mr. Solmes; Rich Solmes you know they call him. But this application
has not met with the attention of one single soul.

If none of his schemes of getting me married take effect, he has
thoughts, I am told, of proposing to me to go to Scotland, that as the
compliment is, I may put his house there in such order as our own is in.
But this my mother intends to oppose for her own sake; because having
relieved her, as she is pleased to say, of the household cares (for
which my sister, you know, has no turn) they must again devolve upon her
if I go. And if she did not oppose it, I should; for, believe me, I have
no mind to be his housekeeper; and I am sure, were I to go with him, I
should be treated rather as a servant than a sister:--perhaps, not the
better because I am his sister. And if Mr. Lovelace should follow me,
things might be worse than they are now.

But I have besought my mother, who is apprehensive of Mr. Lovelace's
visits, and for fear of whom my uncles never stir out without arms and
armed servants (my brother also being near well enough to go abroad),
to procure me permission to be your guest for a fortnight, or so.--Will
your mother, think you, my dear, give me leave?

I dare not ask to go to my dairy-house, as my good grandfather would
call it: for I am now afraid of being thought to have a wish to enjoy
that independence to which his will has entitled me: and as matter are
situated, such a wish would be imputed to my regard to the man to whom
they have now so great an antipathy. And indeed could I be as easy and
happy here as I used to be, I would defy that man and all his sex; and
never repent that I have given the power of my fortune into my father's
hands.


***


Just now, my mother has rejoiced me with the news that my requested
permission is granted. Every one thinks it best that I should go to you,
except my brother. But he was told, that he must not expect to rule in
every thing. I am to be sent for into the great parlour, where are my
two uncles and my aunt Hervey, and to be acquainted with this concession
in form.

You know, my dear, that there is a good deal of solemnity among us.
But never was there a family more united in its different branches than
ours. Our uncles consider us as their own children, and declare that it
is for our sakes that they live single. So that they are advised
with upon every article relating to us, or that may affect us. It is
therefore the less wonder, at a time when they understand that Mr.
Lovelace is determined to pay us an amicable visit, as he calls it, (but
which I am sure cannot end amicably,) that they should both be consulted
upon the permission I had desired to attend you.


***


I will acquaint you with what passed at the general leave given me to be
your guest. And yet I know that you will not love my brother the better
for my communication. But I am angry with him myself, and cannot help
it. And besides, it is proper to let you know the terms I go upon, and
their motives for permitting me to go.

Clary, said my mother, as soon as I entered the great parlour, your
request to go to Miss Howe's for a few days has been taken into
consideration, and granted--

Much against my liking, I assure you, said my brother, rudely
interrupting her.

Son James! said my father, and knit his brows.

He was not daunted. His arm was in a sling. He often has the mean art
to look upon that, when any thing is hinted that may be supposed to lead
toward the least favour to or reconciliation with Mr. Lovelace.--Let the
girl then [I am often the girl with him] be prohibited seeing that vile
libertine.

Nobody spoke.

Do you hear, sister Clary? taking their silence for approbation of what
he had dictated; you are not to receive visits from Lord M.'s nephew.

Every one still remained silent.

Do you so understand the license you have, Miss? interrogated he.

I would be glad, Sir, said I, to understand that you are my
brother;--and that you would understand that you are only my brother.

O the fond, fond heart! with a sneer of insult, lifting up his hands.

Sir, said I, to my father, to your justice I appeal: If I have deserved
reflection, let me be not spared. But if I am to be answerable for the
rashness--

No more!--No more of either side, said my father. You are not to receive
the visits of that Lovelace, though.--Nor are you, son James, to reflect
upon your sister. She is a worthy child.

Sir, I have done, replied he:--and yet I have her honour at heart, as
much as the honour of the rest of the family.

And hence, Sir, retorted I, your unbrotherly reflections upon me?

Well, but you observe, Miss, said he, that it is not I, but your father,
that tells you, that you are not to receive the visits of that Lovelace.

Cousin Harlowe, said my aunt Hervey, allow me to say, that my cousin
Clary's prudence may be confided in.

I am convinced it may, joined my mother.

But, aunt, but, madam (put in my sister) there is no hurt, I presume, in
letting my sister know the condition she goes to Miss Howe upon; since,
if he gets a nack of visiting her there--

You may be sure, interrupted my uncle Harlowe, he will endeavour to see
her there.

So would such an impudent man here, said my uncle Antony: and 'tis
better done there than here.

Better no where, said my father.--I command you (turning to me) on pain
of displeasure, that you see him not at all.

I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I do assure you: not at
all, if I can properly avoid it.

You know with what indifference, said my mother, she has hitherto seen
him.--Her prudence may be trusted to, as my sister Hervey says.

With what appa--rent indifference, drawled my brother.

Son James! said my father sternly.

I have done, Sir, said he. But again, in a provoking manner, he reminded
me of the prohibition.

Thus ended the conference.

Will you engage, my dear, that the hated man shall not come near your
house?--But what an inconsistence is this, when they consent to my
going, thinking his visits here no otherwise to be avoided!--But if he
does come, I charge you never to leave us alone together.

As I have no reason to doubt a welcome from your good mother, I will put
every thing in order here, and be with you in two or three days.

Mean time, I am Your most affectionate and obliged, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER VII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [AFTER HER RETURN FROM HER.]
HARLOWE-PLACE, FEB. 20.


I beg your excuse for not writing sooner. Alas! my dear, I have sad
prospects before me! My brother and sister have succeeded in all their
views. They have found out another lover for me; an hideous one!--Yet
he is encouraged by every body. No wonder that I was ordered home so
suddenly. At an hour's warning!--No other notice, you know, than what
was brought with the chariot that was to carry me back.--It was for
fear, as I have been informed [an unworthy fear!] that I should have
entered into any concert with Mr. Lovelace had I known their motive for
commanding me home; apprehending, 'tis evident, that I should dislike
the man they had to propose to me.

And well might they apprehend so:--For who do you think he is?--No
other than that Solmes--Could you have believed it?--And they are all
determined too; my mother with the rest!--Dear, dear excellence! how
could she be thus brought over, when I am assured, that on his first
being proposed she was pleased to say, That had Mr. Solmes the Indies
in possession, and would endow me with them, she should not think him
deserving of her Clarissa!

The reception I met with at my return, so different from what I used to
meet with on every little absence [and now I had been from them three
weeks], convinced me that I was to suffer for the happiness I had had
in your company and conversation for that most agreeable period. I will
give you an account of it.

My brother met me at the door, and gave me his hand when I stepped out
of the chariot. He bowed very low: pray, Miss, favour me.--I thought it
in good humour; but found it afterwards mock respect: and so he led
me in great form, I prattling all the way, inquiring of every body's
health, (although I was so soon to see them, and there was hardly time
for answers,) into the great parlour; where were my father, mother, my
two uncles, and sister.

I was struck all of a heap as soon as I entered, to see a solemnity
which I had been so little used to on the like occasions in the
countenance of every dear relation. They all kept their seats. I ran
to my father, and kneeled: then to my mother: and met from both a cold
salute: From my father a blessing but half pronounced: My mother indeed
called me child; but embraced me not with her usual indulgent ardour.

After I had paid my duty to my uncles, and my compliments to my sister,
which she received with solemn and stiff form, I was bid to sit down.
But my heart was full: and I said it became me to stand, if I could
stand, upon a reception so awful and unusual. I was forced to turn my
face from them, and pull out my handkerchief.

My unbrotherly accuser hereupon stood forth, and charged me with having
received no less than five or six visits at Miss Howe's from the
man they had all so much reason to hate [that was the expression];
notwithstanding the commands I had had to the contrary. And he bid me
deny it if I could.

I had never been used, I said, to deny the truth, nor would I now. I
owned I had in the three weeks passed seen the person I presumed he
meant oftener than five or six times [Pray hear me, brother, said I; for
he was going to flame out], but he always asked for Mrs. or Miss Howe,
when he came.

I proceeded, that I had reason to believe, that both Mrs. Howe and Miss,
as matters stood, would much rather have excused his visits; but they
had more than once apologized, that having not the same reason my papa
had to forbid him their house, his rank and fortune entitled him to
civility.

You see, my dear, I made not the pleas I might have made.

My brother seemed ready to give a loose to his passion: My father put
on the countenance which always portends a gathering storm: My uncles
mutteringly whispered: And my sister aggravatingly held up her hands.
While I begged to be heard out:--And my mother said, let the child, that
was her kind word, be heard.

I hoped, I said, there was no harm done: that it became not me to
prescribe to Mrs. or Miss Howe who should be their visitors: that Mrs.
Howe was always diverted with the raillery that passed between Miss and
him: that I had no reason to challenge her guest for my visitor, as I
should seem to have done had I refused to go into their company when he
was with them: that I had never seen him out of the presence of one or
both of those ladies; and had signified to him once, on his urging a
few moments' private conversation with me, that, unless a reconciliation
were effected between my family and his, he must not expect that I would
countenance his visits, much less give him an opportunity of that sort.

I told him further, that Miss Howe so well understood my mind, that she
never left me a moment while Mr. Lovelace was there: that when he came,
if I was not below in the parlour, I would not suffer myself to be
called to him: although I thought it would be an affectation which would
give him an advantage rather than the contrary, if I had left company
when he came in; or refused to enter into it when I found he would stay
any time.

My brother heard me out with such a kind of impatience as shewed he was
resolved to be dissatisfied with me, say what I would. The rest, as the
event has proved, behaved as if they would have been satisfied, had
they not further points to carry by intimidating me. All this made it
evident, as I mentioned above, that they themselves expected not my
voluntary compliance; and was a tacit confession of the disagreeableness
of the person they had to propose.

I was no sooner silent than my brother swore, although in my father's
presence, (swore, unchecked either by eye or countenance,) That for his
part, he would never be reconciled to that libertine: and that he would
renounce me for a sister, if I encouraged the addresses of a man so
obnoxious to them all.

A man who had like to have been my brother's murderer, my sister said,
with a face even bursting with restraint of passion.

The poor Bella has, you know, a plump high-fed face, if I may be allowed
the expression. You, I know, will forgive me for this liberty of speech
sooner than I can forgive myself: Yet how can one be such a reptile as
not to turn when trampled upon!

My father, with vehemence both of action and voice [my father has, you
know, a terrible voice when he is angry] told me that I had met with too
much indulgence in being allowed to refuse this gentleman, and the other
gentleman,; and it was now his turn to be obeyed!

Very true, my mother said:--and hoped his will would not now be disputed
by a child so favoured.

To shew they were all of a sentiment, my uncle Harlowe said, he hoped
his beloved niece only wanted to know her father's will, to obey it.

And my uncle Antony, in his rougher manner, added, that surely I would
not give them reason to apprehend, that I thought my grandfather's
favour to me had made me independent of them all.--If I did, he would
tell me, the will could be set aside, and should.

I was astonished, you must needs think.--Whose addresses now, thought I,
is this treatment preparative to?--Mr. Wyerley's again?--or whose? And
then, as high comparisons, where self is concerned, sooner than low,
come into young people's heads; be it for whom it will, this is wooing
as the English did for the heiress of Scotland in the time of Edward
the Sixth. But that it could be for Solmes, how should it enter into my
head?

I did not know, I said, that I had given occasion for this harshness.
I hoped I should always have a just sense of every one's favour to me,
superadded to the duty I owed as a daughter and a niece: but that I was
so much surprised at a reception so unusual and unexpected, that I hoped
my papa and mamma would give me leave to retire, in order to recollect
myself.

No one gainsaying, I made my silent compliments, and withdrew;--leaving
my brother and sister, as I thought, pleased; and as if they wanted to
congratulate each other on having occasioned so severe a beginning to be
made with me.

I went up to my chamber, and there with my faithful Hannah deplored the
determined face which the new proposal it was plain they had to make me
wore.

I had not recovered myself when I was sent for down to tea. I begged
my maid to be excused attending; but on the repeated command, went down
with as much cheerfulness as I could assume; and had a new fault to
clear myself of: for my brother, so pregnant a thing is determined
ill-will, by intimations equally rude and intelligible, charged my
desire of being excused coming down, to sullens, because a certain
person had been spoken against, upon whom, as he supposed, my fancy ran.

I could easily answer you, Sir, said I, as such a reflection deserves:
but I forbear. If I do not find a brother in you, you shall have a
sister in me.

Pretty meekness! Bella whisperingly said; looking at my brother, and
lifting up her lip in contempt.

He, with an imperious air, bid me deserve his love, and I should be sure
to have it.

As we sat, my mother, in her admirable manner, expatiated upon brotherly
and sisterly love; indulgently blamed my brother and sister for having
taken up displeasure too lightly against me; and politically, if I may
say so, answered for my obedience to my father's will.--The it would be
all well, my father was pleased to say: Then they should dote upon me,
was my brother's expression: Love me as well as ever, was my sister's:
And my uncles, That I then should be the pride of their hearts.--But,
alas! what a forfeiture of all these must I make!

This was the reception I had on my return from you.

Mr. Solmes came in before we had done tea. My uncle Antony presented
him to me, as a gentleman he had a particular friendship for. My uncle
Harlowe in terms equally favourable for him. My father said, Mr. Solmes
is my friend, Clarissa Harlowe. My mother looked at him, and looked at
me, now-and-then, as he sat near me, I thought with concern.--I at her,
with eyes appealing for pity. At him, when I could glance at him, with
disgust little short of affrightment. While my brother and sister Mr.
Solmes'd him, and Sirr'd--yet such a wretch!--But I will at present only
add, My humble thanks and duty to your honoured mother (to whom I will
particularly write, to express the grateful sense I have of her goodness
to me); and that I am

Your ever obliged, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER VIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FEB. 24.


They drive on here at a furious rate. The man lives here, I think.
He courts them, and is more and more a favourite. Such terms, such
settlements! That's the cry.

O my dear, that I had not reason to deplore the family fault, immensely
rich as they all are! But this I may the more unreservedly say to you,
as we have often joined in the same concern: I, for a father and uncles;
you, for a mother; in every other respect, faultless.

Hitherto, I seem to be delivered over to my brother, who pretends as
great a love to me as ever.

You may believe I have been very sincere with him. But he affects
to rally me, and not to believe it possible, that one so dutiful and
discreet as his sister Clary can resolve to disoblige all her friends.

Indeed, I tremble at the prospect before me; for it is evident that they
are strangely determined.

My father and mother industriously avoid giving me opportunity of
speaking to them alone. They ask not for my approbation, intended, as it
should seem, to suppose me into their will. And with them I shall hope
to prevail, or with nobody. They have not the interest in compelling me,
as my brother and sister have: I say less therefore to them, reserving
my whole force for an audience of my father, if he will permit me a
patient ear. How difficult is it, my dear, to give a negative where both
duty and inclination join to make one wish to oblige!

I have already stood the shock of three of this man's particular visits,
besides my share in his more general ones; and find it is impossible
I should ever endure him. He has but a very ordinary share of
understanding; is very illiterate; knows nothing but the value of
estates, and how to improve them, and what belongs to land-jobbing and
husbandry. Yet I am as one stupid, I think. They have begun so cruelly
with me, that I have not spirit enough to assert my own negative.

They had endeavoured it seems to influence my good Mrs. Norton before I
came home--so intent are they to carry their point! And her opinion
not being to their liking, she has been told that she would do well to
decline visiting here for the present: yet she is the person of all the
world, next to my mother, the most likely to prevail upon me, were the
measures they are engaged in reasonable measures, or such as she could
think so.

My aunt likewise having said that she did not think her niece could ever
be brought to like Mr. Solmes, has been obliged to learn another lesson.

I am to have a visit from her to-morrow. And, since I have refused so
much as to hear from my brother and sister what the noble settlements
are to be, she is to acquaint me with the particulars; and to receive
from me my determination: for my father, I am told, will not have
patience but to suppose that I shall stand in opposition to his will.

Mean time it has been signified to me, that it will be acceptable if I
do not think of going to church next Sunday.

The same signification was made for me last Sunday; and I obeyed. They
are apprehensive that Mr. Lovelace will be there with design to come
home with me.

Help me, dear Miss Howe, to a little of your charming spirit: I never
more wanted it.

The man, this Solmes, you may suppose, has no reason to boast of his
progress with me. He has not the sense to say any thing to the purpose.
His courtship indeed is to them; and my brother pretends to court me
as his proxy, truly!--I utterly, to my brother, reject his address; but
thinking a person, so well received and recommended by all my family,
entitled to good manners, all I say against him is affectedly attributed
to coyness: and he, not being sensible of his own imperfections,
believes that my avoiding him when I can, and the reserves I express,
are owing to nothing else: for, as I said, all his courtship is to
them; and I have no opportunity of saying no, to one who asks me not the
question. And so, with an air of mannish superiority, he seems rather to
pity the bashful girl, than to apprehend that he shall not succeed.


FEBRUARY 25.


I have had the expected conference with my aunt.

I have been obliged to hear the man's proposals from her; and have been
told also what their motives are for espousing his interest with so much
warmth. I am even loth to mention how equally unjust it is for him to
make such offers, or for those I am bound to reverence to accept of
them. I hate him more than before. One great estate is already obtained
at the expense of the relations to it, though distant relations; my
brother's, I mean, by his godmother: and this has given the hope,
however chimerical that hope, of procuring others; and that my own at
least may revert to the family. And yet, in my opinion, the world is
but one great family. Originally it was so. What then is this narrow
selfishness that reigns in us, but relationship remembered against
relationship forgot?

But here, upon my absolute refusal of him upon any terms, have I had
a signification made me that wounds me to the heart. How can I tell it
you? Yet I must. It is, my dear, that I must not for a month to come, or
till license obtained, correspond with any body out of the house.

My brother, upon my aunt's report, (made, however, as I am informed,
in the gentlest manner, and even giving remote hopes, which she had no
commission from me to give,) brought me, in authoritative terms, the
prohibition.

Not to Miss Howe? said I.

No, not to Miss Howe, Madam, tauntingly: for have you not acknowledged,
that Lovelace is a favourite there?

See, my dear Miss Howe--!

And do you think, Brother, this is the way--

Do you look to that.--But your letters will be stopt, I can tell
you.--And away he flung.

My sister came to me soon after--Sister Clary, you are going on in a
fine way, I understand. But as there are people who are supposed to
harden you against your duty, I am to tell you, that it will be taken
well if you avoid visits or visitings for a week or two till further
order.

Can this be from those who have authority--

Ask them; ask them, child, with a twirl of her finger.--I have delivered
my message. Your father will be obeyed. He is willing to hope you to be
all obedience, and would prevent all incitements to refractoriness.

I know my duty, said I; and hope I shall not find impossible condition
annexed to it.

A pert young creature, vain and conceited, she called me. I was the only
judge, in my own wise opinion, of what was right and fit. She, for her
part, had long seen into my specious ways: and now I should shew every
body what I was at bottom.

Dear Bella! said I, hands and eyes lifted up--why all this?--Dear, dear
Bella, why--

None of your dear, dear Bella's to me.--I tell you, I see through your
witchcrafts [that was her strange word]. And away she flung; adding, as
she went, and so will every body else very quickly, I dare say.

Bless me, said I to myself, what a sister have I!--How have I deserved
this?

Then I again regretted my grandfather's too distinguishing goodness to
me.


FEB. 25, IN THE EVENING.


What my brother and sister have said against me I cannot tell:--but I am
in heavy disgrace with my father.

I was sent for down to tea. I went with a very cheerful aspect: but had
occasion soon to change it.

Such a solemnity in every body's countenance!--My mother's eyes were
fixed upon the tea-cups; and when she looked up, it was heavily, as if
her eye-lids had weights upon them; and then not to me. My father sat
half-aside in his elbow-chair, that his head might be turned from me:
his hands clasped, and waving, as it were, up and down; his fingers,
poor dear gentleman! in motion, as if angry to the very ends of them. My
sister was swelling. My brother looked at me with scorn, having measured
me, as I may say, with his eyes as I entered, from head to foot. My aunt
was there, and looked upon me as if with kindness restrained, bending
coldly to my compliment to her as she sat; and then cast an eye first on
my brother, then on my sister, as if to give the reason [so I am willing
to construe it] of her unusual stiffness.--Bless me, my dear! that they
should choose to intimidate rather than invite a mind, till now, not
thought either unpersuadable or ungenerous!

I took my seat. Shall I make tea, Madam, to my mother?--I always used,
you know, my dear, to make tea.

No! a very short sentence, in one very short word, was the expressive
answer. And she was pleased to take the canister in her own hand.

My brother bid the footman, who attended, leave the room--I, he said,
will pour out the water.

My heart was up in my mouth. I did not know what to do with myself. What
is to follow? thought I.

Just after the second dish, out stept my mother--A word with you, sister
Hervey! taking her in her hand. Presently my sister dropt away. Then my
brother. So I was left alone with my father.

He looked so very sternly, that my heart failed me as twice or thrice
I would have addressed myself to him: nothing but solemn silence on all
hands having passed before.

At last, I asked, if it were his pleasure that I should pour him out
another dish?

He answered me with the same angry monosyllable, which I had received
from my mother before; and then arose, and walked about the room. I
arose too, with intent to throw myself at his feet; but was too much
overawed by his sternness, even to make such an expression of my duty to
him as my heart overflowed with.

At last, as he supported himself, because of his gout, on the back of a
chair, I took a little more courage; and approaching him, besought him
to acquaint me in what I had offended him?

He turned from me, and in a strong voice, Clarissa Harlowe, said he,
know that I will be obeyed.

God forbid, Sir, that you should not!--I have never yet opposed your
will--

Nor I your whimsies, Clarissa Harlowe, interrupted he.--Don't let me
run the fate of all who shew indulgence to your sex; to be the more
contradicted for mine to you.

My father, you know, my dear, has not (any more than my brother) a kind
opinion of our sex; although there is not a more condescending wife in
the world than my mother.

I was going to make protestations of duty--No protestations, girl! No
words! I will not be prated to! I will be obeyed! I have no child, I
will have no child, but an obedient one.

Sir, you never had reason, I hope--

Tell me not what I never had, but what I have, and what I shall have.

Good Sir, be pleased to hear me--My brother and sister, I fear--

Your brother and sister shall not be spoken against, girl!--They have a
just concern for the honour of my family.

And I hope, Sir--

Hope nothing.--Tell me not of hopes, but of facts. I ask nothing of you
but what is in your power to comply with, and what it is your duty to
comply with.

Then, Sir, I will comply with it--But yet I hope from your goodness--

No expostulations! No but's, girl! No qualifyings! I will be obeyed, I
tell you; and cheerfully too!--or you are no child of mine!

I wept.

Let me beseech you, my dear and ever-honoured Papa, (and I dropt down
on my knees,) that I may have only yours and my mamma's will, and not my
brother's, to obey.

I was going on; but he was pleased to withdraw, leaving me on the floor;
saying, That he would not hear me thus by subtilty and cunning aiming to
distinguish away my duty: repeating, that he would be obeyed.

My heart is too full;--so full, that it may endanger my duty, were I
to try to unburden it to you on this occasion: so I will lay down my
pen.--But can--Yet positively, I will lay down my pen--!




LETTER IX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FEB. 26, IN THE MORNING.


My aunt, who staid here last night, made me a visit this morning as
soon as it was light. She tells me, that I was left alone with my
father yesterday on purpose that he might talk with me on my expected
obedience; but that he owned he was put beside his purpose by reflecting
on something my brother had told him in my disfavour, and by his
impatience but to suppose, that such a gentle spirit as mine had
hitherto seemed to be, should presume to dispute his will in a point
where the advantage of the whole family was to be so greatly promoted by
my compliance.

I find, by a few words which dropt unawares from my aunt, that they have
all an absolute dependence upon what they suppose to be meekness in my
temper. But in this they may be mistaken; for I verily think, upon a
strict examination of myself, that I have almost as much in me of my
father's as of my mother's family.

My uncle Harlowe it seems is against driving me upon extremities: But
my brother has engaged, that the regard I have for my reputation, and
my principles, will bring me round to my duty; that's the expression.
Perhaps I shall have reason to wish I had not known this.

My aunt advises me to submit for the present to the interdicts they
have laid me under; and indeed to encourage Mr. Solmes's address. I have
absolutely refused the latter, let what will (as I have told her) be the
consequence. The visiting prohibition I will conform to. But as to that
of not corresponding with you, nothing but the menace that our letters
shall be intercepted, can engage my observation of it.

She believes that this order is from my father, and that my mother
has not been consulted upon it. She says, that it is given, as she has
reason think, purely in consideration to me, lest I should mortally
offend him; and this from the incitements of other people (meaning you
and Miss Lloyd, I make no doubt) rather than by my own will. For still,
as she tells me, he speaks kind and praiseful things of me.

Here is clemency! Here is indulgence!--And so it is, to prevent a
headstrong child, as a good prince would wish to deter disaffected
subjects, from running into rebellion, and so forfeiting every thing!
But this is allowing to the young-man's wisdom of my brother; a plotter
without a head, and a brother without a heart!

How happy might I have been with any other brother in the world but
James Harlowe; and with any other sister but his sister! Wonder not, my
dear, that I, who used to chide you for these sort of liberties with my
relations, now am more undutiful than you ever was unkind. I cannot bear
the thought of being deprived of the principal pleasure of my life; for
such is your conversation by person and by letter. And who, besides, can
bear to be made the dupe of such low cunning, operating with such high
and arrogant passions?

But can you, my dear Miss Howe, condescend to carry on a private
correspondence with me?--If you can, there is one way I have thought of,
by which it may be done.

You must remember the Green Lane, as we call it, that runs by the side
of the wood-house and poultry-yard where I keep my bantams, pheasants,
and pea-hens, which generally engage my notice twice a day; the more
my favourites because they were my grandfather's, and recommended to my
care by him; and therefore brought hither from my Dairy-house since his
death.

The lane is lower than the floor of the wood-house; and, in the side of
the wood-house, the boards are rotted away down to the floor for half an
ell together in several places. Hannah can step into the lane, and make
a mark with chalk where a letter or parcel may be pushed in, under some
sticks; which may be so managed as to be an unsuspected cover for the
written deposits from either.


***


I have been just now to look at the place, and find it will answer. So
your faithful Robert may, without coming near the house, and as only
passing through the Green Lame which leads to two or three farm-houses
[out of livery if you please] very easily take from thence my letters
and deposit yours.

This place is the more convenient, because it is seldom resorted to
but by myself or Hannah, on the above-mentioned account; for it is the
general store-house for firing; the wood for constant use being nearer
the house.

One corner of this being separated off for the roosting-place of my
little poultry, either she or I shall never want a pretence to go
thither.

Try, my dear, the success of a letter this way; and give me your opinion
and advice what to do in this disgraceful situation, as I cannot but
call it; and what you think of my prospects; and what you would do in my
case.

But before-hand I will tell you, that your advice must not run in favour
of this Solmes: and yet it is very likely they will endeavour to engage
your mother, in order to induce you, who have such an influence over me,
to favour him.

Yet, on second thoughts, if you incline to that side of the question,
I would have you write your whole mind. Determined as I think I am, and
cannot help it, I would at least give a patient hearing to what may be
said on the other side. For my regards are not so much engaged [upon my
word they are not; I know not myself if they be] to another person as
some of my friends suppose; and as you, giving way to your lively vein,
upon his last visits, affected to suppose. What preferable favour I
may have for him to any other person, is owing more to the usage he has
received, and for my sake borne, than to any personal consideration.

I write a few lines of grateful acknowledgement to your good mother for
her favours to me in the late happy period. I fear I shall never know
such another. I hope she will forgive me, that I did not write sooner.

The bearer, if suspected and examined, is to produce that as the only
one he carries.

How do needless watchfulness and undue restraint produce artifice and
contrivance! I should abhor these clandestine correspondences, were they
not forced upon me. They have so mean, so low an appearance to myself,
that I think I ought not to expect that you should take part in them.

But why (as I have also expostulated with my aunt) must I be pushed
into a state, which I have no wish to enter into, although I reverence
it?--Why should not my brother, so many years older, and so earnest to
see me engaged, be first engaged?--And why should not my sister be first
provided for?

But here I conclude these unavailing expostulations, with the assurance,
that I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER X

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE FEB. 27


What odd heads some people have!--Miss Clarissa Harlowe to be sacrificed
in marriage to Mr. Roger Solmes!--Astonishing!

I must not, you say, give my advice in favour of this man!--You now
convince me, my dear, that you are nearer of kin than I thought you,
to the family that could think of so preposterous a match, or you would
never have had the least notion of my advising in his favour.

Ask for his picture. You know I have a good hand at drawing an ugly
likeness. But I'll see a little further first: for who knows what may
happen, since matters are in such a train; and since you have not the
courage to oppose so overwhelming a torrent?

You ask me to help you to a little of my spirit. Are you in earnest?
But it will not now, I doubt, do you service.--It will not sit naturally
upon you. You are your mother's girl, think what you will; and have
violent spirits to contend with. Alas! my dear, you should have borrowed
some of mine a little sooner;--that is to say, before you had given the
management of your estate into the hands of those who think they have a
prior claim to it. What though a father's!--Has not the father two elder
children?--And do they not both bear more of his stamp and image than
you do?--Pray, my dear, call me not to account for this free question;
lest your application of my meaning, on examination, prove to be as
severe as that.

Now I have launched out a little, indulge me one word more in the same
strain--I will be decent, I promise you. I think you might have know,
that Avarice and Envy are two passions that are not to be satisfied, the
one by giving, the other by the envied person's continuing to deserve
and excel.--Fuel, fuel both, all the world over, to flames insatiate and
devouring.

But since you ask for my opinion, you must tell me all you know or
surmise of their inducements. And if you will not forbid me to make
extracts from your letters for the entertainment of my aunt and cousin
in the little island, who long to hear more of your affairs, it will be
very obliging.

But you are so tender of some people who have no tenderness for any body
but themselves, that I must conjure you to speak out. Remember, that
a friendship like ours admits of no reserves. You may trust my
impartiality. It would be an affront to your own judgment, if you did
not: For do you not ask my advice? And have you not taught me that
friendship should never give a bias against justice?--Justify them,
therefore, if you can. Let us see if there be any sense, whether
sufficient reason or not in their choice. At present I cannot (and yet
I know a good deal of your family) have any conception how all of them,
your mother and your aunt Hervey in particular, can join with the rest
against judgments given. As to some of the others, I cannot wonder at
any thing they do, or attempt to do, where self is concerned.

You ask, Why may not your brother be first engaged in wedlock? I'll tell
you why: His temper and his arrogance are too well known to induce women
he would aspire to, to receive his addresses, notwithstanding his great
independent acquisitions, and still greater prospects. Let me tell you,
my dear, those acquisitions have given him more pride than reputation.
To me he is the most intolerable creature that I ever conversed with.
The treatment you blame, he merited from one whom he addressed with the
air of a person who presumes that he is about to confer a favour, rather
than to receive one. I ever loved to mortify proud and insolent spirits.
What, think you, makes me bear Hickman near me, but that the man is
humble, and knows and keeps his distance?

As to your question, Why your elder sister may not be first provided
for? I answer, Because she must have no man, but one who has a great and
clear estate; that's one thing. Another is, Because she has a younger
sister. Pray, my dear, be so good as to tell me, What man of a great and
clear estate would think of that eldest sister, while the younger were
single?

You are all too rich to be happy, child. For must not each of you, by
the constitutions of your family, marry to be still richer? People who
know in what their main excellence consists, are not to be blamed (are
they) for cultivating and improving what they think most valuable?--Is
true happiness any part of your family view?--So far from it, that none
of your family but yourself could be happy were they not rich. So let
them fret on, grumble and grudge, and accumulate; and wondering what
ails them that they have not happiness when they have riches, think the
cause is want of more; and so go on heaping up, till Death, as greedy an
accumulator as themselves, gathers them into his garner.

Well then once more I say, do you, my dear, tell me what you know of
their avowed and general motives; and I will tell you more than you will
tell me of their failings! Your aunt Hervey, you say,* has told you: Why
must I ask you to let me know them, when you condescend to ask my advice
on the occasion?


    * See Letter VIII.


That they prohibit your corresponding with me, is a wisdom I neither
wonder at, nor blame them for: since it is an evidence to me, that they
know their own folly: And if they do, is it strange that they should be
afraid to trust one another's judgment upon it?

I am glad you have found out a way to correspond with me. I approve
it much. I shall more, if this first trial of it prove successful. But
should it not, and should it fall into their hands, it would not concern
me but for your sake.

We have heard before you wrote, that all was not right between your
relations and you at your coming home: that Mr. Solmes visited you, and
that with a prospect of success. But I concluded the mistake lay in the
person; and that his address was to Miss Arabella. And indeed had she
been as good-natured as your plump ones generally are, I should have
thought her too good for him by half. This must certainly be the thing,
thought I; and my beloved friend is sent for to advise and assist in her
nuptial preparations. Who knows, said I to my mother, but that when
the man has thrown aside his yellow full-buckled peruke, and his
broad-brimmed beaver (both of which I suppose were Sir Oliver's best
of long standing) he may cut a tolerable figure dangling to church
with Miss Bell!--The woman, as she observes, should excel the man in
features: and where can she match so well for a foil?

I indulged this surmise against rumour, because I could not believe that
the absurdest people in England could be so very absurd as to think of
this man for you.

We heard, moreover, that you received no visiters. I could assign no
reason for this, except that the preparations for your sister were to be
private, and the ceremony sudden, for fear this man should, as another
man did, change his mind. Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph were with me to
inquire what I knew of this; and of your not being in church, either
morning or afternoon, the Sunday after your return from us; to the
disappointment of a little hundred of your admirers, to use their words.
It was easy for me to guess the reason to be what you confirm--their
apprehensions that Lovelace would be there, and attempt to wait on you
home.

My mother takes very kindly your compliments in your letter to her. Her
words upon reading it were, 'Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an admirable young
lady: wherever she goes, she confers a favour: whomever she leaves, she
fills with regret.'--And then a little comparative reflection--'O my
Nancy, that you had a little of her sweet obligingness!'

No matter. The praise was yours. You are me; and I enjoyed it. The more
enjoyed it, because--Shall I tell you the truth?--Because I think myself
as well as I am--were it but for this reason, that had I twenty brother
James's, and twenty sister Bell's, not one of them, nor all of them
joined together, would dare to treat me as yours presume to treat you.
The person who will bear much shall have much to bear all the world
through; it is your own sentiment,* grounded upon the strongest instance
that can be given in your own family; though you have so little improved
by it.


     * Letter V.


The result is this, that I am fitter for this world than you; you for
the next than me:--that is the difference.--But long, long, for my sake,
and for hundreds of sakes, may it be before you quit us for company more
congenial to you and more worthy of you!

I communicated to my mother the account you give of your strange
reception; also what a horrid wretch they have found out for you; and
the compulsory treatment they give you. It only set her on magnifying
her lenity to me, on my tyrannical behaviour, as she will call it
[mothers must have their way, you know, my dear] to the man whom she so
warmly recommends, against whom it seems there can be no just exception;
and expatiating upon the complaisance I owe her for her indulgence. So I
believe I must communicate to her nothing farther--especially as I know
she would condemn the correspondence between us, and that between you
and Lovelace, as clandestine and undutiful proceedings, and divulge our
secret besides; for duty implicit is her cry. And moreover she lends
a pretty open ear to the preachments of that starch old bachelor your
uncle Antony; and for an example to her daughter would be more careful
how she takes your part, be the cause ever so just.

Yet is this not the right policy neither. For people who allow nothing
will be granted nothing: in other words, those who aim at carrying too
many points will not be able to carry any.

But can you divine, my dear, what the old preachment-making,
plump-hearted soul, your uncle Antony, means by his frequent amblings
hither?--There is such smirking and smiling between my mother and him!
Such mutual praises of economy; and 'that is my way!'--and 'this I
do!'--and 'I am glad it has your approbation, Sir!'--and 'you look into
every thing, Madam!'--'Nothing would be done, if I did not!'--

Such exclamations against servants! Such exaltings of self! And
dear heart, and good lack!--and 'las a-day!--And now-and-then their
conversation sinking into a whispering accent, if I come across
them!--I'll tell you, my dear, I don't above half like it.

Only that these old bachelors usually take as many years to resolve upon
matrimony as they can reasonably expect to live, or I should be ready
to fire upon his visits; and to recommend Mr. Hickman to my mother's
acceptance, as a much more eligible man: for what he wants in years,
he makes up in gravity; and if you will not chide me, I will say, that
there is a primness in both (especially when the man has presumed too
much with me upon my mother's favour for him, and is under discipline on
that account) as make them seem near of kin: and then in contemplation
of my sauciness, and what they both fear from it, they sigh away! and
seem so mightily to compassionate each other, that if pity be but one
remove from love, I am in no danger, while they are both in a great
deal, and don't know it.

Now, my dear, I know you will be upon me with your grave airs: so in for
the lamb, as the saying is, in for the sheep; and do you yourself look
about you; for I'll have a pull with you by way of being aforehand.
Hannibal, we read, always advised to attack the Romans upon their own
territories.

You are pleased to say, and upon your word too! that your regards (a
mighty quaint word for affections) are not so much engaged, as some
of your friends suppose, to another person. What need you give one to
imagine, my dear, that the last month or two has been a period extremely
favourable to that other person, whom it has made an obliger of the
niece for his patience with the uncles.

But, to pass that by--so much engaged!--How much, my dear?--Shall I
infer? Some of your friends suppose a great deal. You seem to own a
little.

Don't be angry. It is all fair: because you have not acknowledged to
me that little. People I have heard you say, who affect secrets, always
excite curiosity.

But you proceed with a kind of drawback upon your averment, as if
recollection had given you a doubt--you know not yourself, if they be
[so much engaged]. Was it necessary to say this to me?--and to say
it upon your word too?--But you know best.--Yet you don't neither,
I believe. For a beginning love is acted by a subtle spirit; and
oftentimes discovers itself to a by-stander, when the person possessed
(why should I not call it possessed?) knows not it has such a demon.

But further you say, what preferable favour you may have for him to any
other person, is owing more to the usage he has received, and for your
sake borne, than to any personal consideration.

This is generously said. It is in character. But, O my friend, depend
upon it, you are in danger. Depend upon it, whether you know it or not,
you are a little in for't. Your native generosity and greatness of mind
endanger you: all your friends, by fighting against him with
impolitic violence, fight for him. And Lovelace, my life for yours,
notwithstanding all his veneration and assiduities, has seen further
than that veneration and those assiduities (so well calculated to your
meridian) will let him own he has seen--has seen, in short, that his
work is doing for him more effectually than he could do it for himself.
And have you not before now said, that nothing is so penetrating as the
eye of a lover who has vanity? And who says Lovelace wants vanity?

In short, my dear, it is my opinion, and that from the easiness of his
heart and behaviour, that he has seen more than I have seen; more than
you think could be seen--more than I believe you yourself know, or else
you would let me know it.

Already, in order to restrain him from resenting the indignities he has
received, and which are daily offered him, he has prevailed upon you to
correspond with him privately. I know he has nothing to boast of from
what you have written: but is not his inducing you to receive his
letters, and to answer them, a great point gained? By your insisting
that he should keep the correspondence private, it appears there is one
secret which you do not wish the world should know: and he is master of
that secret. He is indeed himself, as I may say, that secret! What an
intimacy does this beget for the lover! How is it distancing the parent!

Yet who, as things are situated, can blame you?--Your condescension has
no doubt hitherto prevented great mischiefs. It must be continued,
for the same reasons, while the cause remains. You are drawn in by
a perverse fate against inclination: but custom, with such
laudable purposes, will reconcile the inconveniency, and make an
inclination.--And I would advise you (as you would wish to manage on an
occasion so critical with that prudence which governs all your actions)
not to be afraid of entering upon a close examination into the true
springs and grounds of this your generosity to that happy man.

It is my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that on inquiry it will
come out to be LOVE--don't start, my dear!--Has not your man himself had
natural philosophy enough to observe already to your aunt Hervey, that
love takes the deepest root in the steadiest minds? The deuce take his
sly penetration, I was going to say; for this was six or seven weeks
ago.

I have been tinctured, you know. Nor on the coolest reflection, could
I account how and when the jaundice began: but had been over head and
ears, as the saying is, but for some of that advice from you, which I
now return you. Yet my man was not half so--so what, my dear--to be sure
Lovelace is a charming fellow. And were he only--but I will not make
you glow, as you read--upon my word I will not.--Yet, my dear, don't you
find at your heart somewhat unusual make it go throb, throb, throb, as
you read just here?--If you do, don't be ashamed to own it--it is your
generosity, my love, that's all.--But as the Roman augur said, Caesar,
beware of the Ides of March!

Adieu, my dearest friend.--Forgive, and very speedily, by the new found
expedient, tell me that you forgive,

Your ever-affectionate, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1.


You both nettled and alarmed me, my dearest Miss Howe, by the concluding
part of your last. At first reading it, I did not think it necessary,
said I to myself, to guard against a critic, when I was writing to so
dear a friend. But then recollecting myself, is there not more in it,
said I, than the result of a vein so naturally lively? Surely I must
have been guilty of an inadvertence. Let me enter into the close
examination of myself which my beloved friend advises.

I do so; and cannot own any of the glow, any of the throbs you
mention.--Upon my word I will repeat, I cannot. And yet the passages in
my letter, upon which you are so humourously severe, lay me fairly open
to your agreeable raillery. I own they do. And I cannot tell what turn
my mind had taken to dictate so oddly to my pen.

But, pray now--is it saying so much, when one, who has no very
particular regard to any man, says, there are some who are preferable to
others? And is it blamable to say, they are the preferable, who are not
well used by one's relations; yet dispense with that usage out of regard
to one's self which they would otherwise resent? Mr. Lovelace, for
instance, I may be allowed to say, is a man to be preferred to Mr.
Solmes; and that I do prefer him to that man: but, surely, this may be
said without its being a necessary consequence that I must be in love
with him.

Indeed I would not be in love with him, as it is called, for the world:
First, because I have no opinion of his morals; and think it a fault in
which our whole family (my brother excepted) has had a share, that he
was permitted to visit us with a hope, which, however, being distant,
did not, as I have observed heretofore,* entitle any of us to call
him to account for such of his immoralities as came to our ears. Next,
because I think him to be a vain man, capable of triumphing (secretly at
least) over a person whose heart he thinks he has engaged. And, thirdly,
because the assiduities and veneration which you impute to him, seem to
carry an haughtiness in them, as if he thought his address had a merit
in it, that would be more than an equivalent to a woman's love. In
short, his very politeness, notwithstanding the advantages he must have
had from his birth and education, appear to be constrained; and, with
the most remarkable easy and genteel person, something, at times,
seems to be behind in his manner that is too studiously kept in. Then,
good-humoured as he is thought to be in the main to other people's
servants, and this even to familiarity (although, as you have observed,
a familiarity that has dignity in it not unbecoming to a man of quality)
he is apt sometimes to break out into a passion with his own: An oath
or a curse follows, and such looks from those servants as plainly shew
terror, and that they should have fared worse had they not been in my
hearing: with a confirmation in the master's looks of a surmise too well
justified.


     * Letter III.


Indeed, my dear, THIS man is not THE man. I have great objections to
him. My heart throbs not after him. I glow not, but with indignation
against myself for having given room for such an imputation. But you
must not, my dearest friend, construe common gratitude into love. I
cannot bear that you should. But if ever I should have the misfortune to
think it love, I promise you upon my word, which is the same as upon my
honour, that I will acquaint you with it.

You bid me to tell you very speedily, and by the new-found expedient,
that I am not displeased with you for your agreeable raillery: I
dispatch this therefore immediately, postponing to my next the account
of the inducements which my friends have to promote with so much
earnestness the address of Mr. Solmes.

Be satisfied, my dear, mean time, that I am not displeased with you:
indeed I am not. On the contrary, I give you my hearty thanks for your
friendly premonitions; and I charge you (as I have often done) that if
you observe any thing in me so very faulty as would require from you
to others in my behalf the palliation of friendly and partial love, you
acquaint me with it: for methinks I would so conduct myself as not to
give reason even for an adversary to censure me; and how shall so weak
and so young a creature avoid the censure of such, if my friend will not
hold a looking-glass before me to let me see my imperfections?

Judge me, then, my dear, as any indifferent person (knowing what you
know of me) would do. I may be at first be a little pained; may glow a
little perhaps to be found less worthy of your friendship than I wish
to be; but assure yourself, that your kind correction will give me
reflection that shall amend me. If it do not, you will have a fault to
accuse me of, that will be utterly inexcusable: a fault, let me add,
that should you not accuse me of it (if in your opinion I am guilty) you
will not be so much, so warmly, my friend as I am yours; since I have
never spared you on the like occasions.

Here I break off to begin another letter to you, with the assurance,
mean time, that I am, and ever will be,

Your equally affectionate and grateful, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING, MARCH 2.


Indeed you would not be in love with him for the world!--Your servant,
my dear. Nor would I have you. For, I think, with all the advantages of
person, fortune, and family, he is not by any means worthy of you. And
this opinion I give as well from the reasons you mention (which I cannot
but confirm) as from what I have heard of him but a few hours ago
from Mrs. Fortescue, a favourite of Lady Betty Lawrance, who knows him
well--but let me congratulate you, however, on your being the first of
our sex that ever I heard of, who has been able to turn that lion, Love,
at her own pleasure, into a lap-dog.

Well but, if you have not the throbs and the glows, you have not: and
are not in love; good reason why--because you would not be in love; and
there's no more to be said.--Only, my dear, I shall keep a good look-out
upon you; and so I hope you will be upon yourself; for it is no manner
of argument that because you would not be in love, you therefore are
not.--But before I part entirely with this subject, a word in your ear,
my charming friend--'tis only by way of caution, and in pursuance of the
general observation, that a stander-by is often a better judge of the
game than those that play.--May it not be, that you have had, and
have, such cross creatures and such odd heads to deal with, as have not
allowed you to attend to the throbs?--Or, if you had them a little now
and then, whether, having had two accounts to place them to, you have
not by mistake put them to the wrong one?

But whether you have a value for Lovelace or not, I know you will be
impatient to hear what Mrs. Fortescue has said of him. Nor will I keep
you longer in suspense.

An hundred wild stories she tells of him from childhood to manhood:
for, as she observed, having never been subject to contradiction, he
was always as mischievous as a monkey. But I shall pass over these whole
hundred of his puerile rogueries (although indicative ones, as I may
say) to take notice as well of some things you are not quite ignorant
of, as of others you know not, and to make a few observations upon him
and his ways.

Mrs. Fortescue owns, what every body knows, 'that he is notoriously,
nay, avowedly, a man of pleasure; yet says, that in any thing he sets
his heart upon or undertakes, he is the most industrious and persevering
mortal under the sun. He rests it seems not above six hours in the
twenty-four--any more than you. He delights in writing. Whether at Lord
M.'s, or at Lady Betty's, or Lady Sarah's, he has always a pen in his
fingers when he retires. One of his companions (confirming his love of
writing) has told her, that his thoughts flow rapidly to his pen:' And
you and I, my dear, have observed, on more occasions than one, that
though he writes even a fine hand, he is one of the readiest and
quickest of writers. He must indeed have had early a very docile genius;
since a person of his pleasurable turn and active spirit, could
never have submitted to take long or great pains in attaining the
qualifications he is master of; qualifications so seldom attained by
youth of quality and fortune; by such especially of those of either,
who, like him, have never known what it was to be controuled.

'He had once it seems the vanity, upon being complimented on these
talents (and on his surprising diligence, for a man of pleasure) to
compare himself to Julius Caesar; who performed great actions by day,
and wrote them down at night; and valued himself, that he only wanted
Caesar's out-setting, to make a figure among his contemporaries.

'He spoke of this indeed, she says, with an air of pleasantry: for
she observed, and so have we, that he has the art of acknowledging his
vanity with so much humour, that it sets him above the contempt which
is due to vanity and self-opinion; and at the same time half persuades
those who hear him, that he really deserves the exultation he gives
himself.'

But supposing it to be true that all his vacant nightly hours are
employed in writing, what can be his subjects? If, like Caesar, his own
actions, he must undoubtedly be a very enterprising and very wicked man;
since nobody suspects him to have a serious turn; and, decent as he is
in his conversation with us, his writings are not probably such as would
redound either to his own honour, or to the benefit of others, were they
to be read. He must be conscious of this, since Mrs. Fortescue says,
'that in the great correspondence by letters which he holds, he is
as secret and as careful as if it were of a treasonable nature;--yet
troubles not his head with politics, though nobody knows the interests
of princes and courts better than he is said to do.'

That you and I, my dear, should love to write, is no wonder. We have
always, from the time each could hold a pen, delighted in epistolary
correspondencies. Our employments are domestic and sedentary; and we can
scribble upon twenty innocent subjects, and take delight in them because
they are innocent; though were they to be seen, they might not much
profit or please others. But that such a gay, lively young fellow as
this, who rides, hunts, travels, frequents the public entertainments,
and has means to pursue his pleasures, should be able to set himself
down to write for hours together, as you and I have heard him say he
frequently does, that is the strange thing.

Mrs. Fortescue says, 'that he is a complete master of short-hand
writing.' By the way, what inducements could a swift writer as he have
to learn short-hand!

She says (and we know it as well as she) 'that he has a surprising
memory, and a very lively imagination.'

Whatever his other vices are, all the world, as well as Mrs. Fortescue,
says, 'he is a sober man. And among all his bad qualities, gaming, that
great waster of time as well as fortune, is not his vice:' So that he
must have his head as cool, and his reason as clear, as the prime of
youth and his natural gaiety will permit; and by his early morning
hours, a great portion of time upon his hands to employ in writing, or
worse.

Mrs. Fortescue says, 'he has one gentleman who is more his intimate and
correspondent than any of the rest.' You remember what his dismissed
bailiff said of him and of his associates.* I don't find but that Mrs.
Fortescue confirms this part of it, 'that all his relations are afraid
of him; and that his pride sets him above owing obligations to them.
She believes he is clear of the world; and that he will continue so;'
No doubt from the same motive that makes him avoid being obliged to his
relations.


* Letter IV.


A person willing to think favourably of him would hope, that a brave, a
learned, and a diligent, man, cannot be naturally a bad man.--But if he
be better than his enemies say he is (and if worse he is bad indeed) he
is guilty of an inexcusable fault in being so careless as he is of his
reputation. I think a man can be so but from one of these two reasons:
either that he is conscious he deserves the ill spoken of him; or, that
he takes a pride in being thought worse than he is. Both very bad and
threatening indications; since the first must shew him to be utterly
abandoned; and it is but natural to conclude from the other, that what
a man is not ashamed to have imputed to him, he will not scruple to be
guilty of whenever he has an opportunity.

Upon the whole, and upon all I could gather from Mrs. Fortescue, Mr.
Lovelace is a very faulty man. You and I have thought him too gay, too
inconsiderate, too rash, too little an hypocrite, to be deep. You see
he never would disguise his natural temper (haughty as it certainly
is) with respect to your brother's behaviour to him. Where he thinks
a contempt due, he pays it to the uttermost. Nor has he complaisance
enough to spare your uncles.

But were he deep, and ever so deep, you would soon penetrate him, if
they would leave you to yourself. His vanity would be your clue. Never
man had more: Yet, as Mrs. Fortescue observed, 'never did man carry
it off so happily.' There is a strange mixture in it of humourous
vivacity:--Since but for one half of what he says of himself, when he is
in the vein, any other man would be insufferable.


***


Talk of the devil, is an old saying. The lively wretch has made me a
visit, and is but just gone away. He is all impatience and resentment
at the treatment you meet with, and full of apprehensions too, that they
will carry their point with you.

I told him my opinion, that you will never be brought to think of such a
man as Solmes; but that it will probably end in a composition, never to
have either.

No man, he said, whose fortunes and alliances are so considerable, ever
had so little favour from a woman for whose sake he had borne so much.

I told him my mind as freely as I used to do. But whoever was in fault,
self being judge? He complained of spies set upon his conduct, and to
pry into his life and morals, and this by your brother and uncles.

I told him, that this was very hard upon him; and the more so, as
neither his life nor morals perhaps would stand a fair inquiry.

He smiled, and called himself my servant.--The occasion was too fair,
he said, for Miss Howe, who never spared him, to let it pass.--But, Lord
help the shallow souls of the Harlowes! Would I believe it! they were
for turning plotters upon him. They had best take care he did not pay
them in their own coin. Their hearts were better turned for such works
than their heads.

I asked him, If he valued himself upon having a head better turned than
theirs for such works, as he called them?

He drew off: and then ran into the highest professions of reverence and
affection for you.

The object so meritorious, who can doubt the reality of his professions?

Adieu, my dearest, my noble friend!--I love and admire you for the
generous conclusion of your last more than I can express. Though I began
this letter with impertinent raillery, knowing that you always loved to
indulge my mad vein; yet never was there a heart that more glowed with
friendly love, than that of

Your own ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1.


I now take up my pen to lay before you the inducements and motive which
my friends have to espouse so earnestly the address of this Mr. Solmes.

In order to set this matter in a clear light, it is necessary to go a
little back, and even perhaps to mention some things which you already
know: and so you may look upon what I am going to relate, as a kind of
supplement to my letters of the 15th and 20th of January last.*


* Letters IV. and V.


In those letters, of which I have kept memorandums, I gave you an
account of my brother's and sister's antipathy to Mr. Lovelace; and the
methods they took (so far as they had then come to my knowledge) to ruin
him in the opinion of my other friends. And I told you, that after a
very cold, yet not a directly affrontive behaviour to him, they all of
a sudden* became more violent, and proceeded to personal insults; which
brought on at last the unhappy rencounter between my brother and him.


     * See Letter IV.


Now you must know, that from the last conversation that passed between
my aunt and me, it comes out, that this sudden vehemence on my
brother's and sister's parts, was owing to stronger reasons than to the
college-begun antipathy on his side, or to slighted love on hers;
to wit, to an apprehension that my uncles intended to follow my
grandfather's example in my favour; at least in a higher degree
than they wish they should. An apprehension founded it seems on a
conversation between my two uncles and my brother and sister: which my
aunt communicated to me in confidence, as an argument to prevail upon
me to accept of Mr. Solmes's noble settlements: urging, that such a
seasonable compliance, would frustrate my brother's and sister's views,
and establish me for ever in the love of my father and uncles.

I will give you the substance of this communicated conversation, after
I have made a brief introductory observation or two, which however I
hardly need to make to you who are so well acquainted with us all, did
not the series or thread of the story require it.

I have more than once mentioned to you the darling view some of us have
long had of raising a family, as it is called. A reflection, as I have
often thought, upon our own, which is no considerable or upstart one, on
either side, on my mother's especially.--A view too frequently it
seems entertained by families which, having great substance, cannot be
satisfied without rank and title.

My uncles had once extended this view to each of us three children;
urging, that as they themselves intended not to marry, we each of
us might be so portioned, and so advantageously matched, as that
our posterity, if not ourselves, might make a first figure in our
country.--While my brother, as the only son, thought the two girls might
be very well provided for by ten or fifteen thousand pounds a-piece:
and that all the real estates in the family, to wit, my grandfather's,
father's, and two uncles', and the remainder of their respective
personal estates, together with what he had an expectation of from
his godmother, would make such a noble fortune, and give him such an
interest, as might entitle him to hope for a peerage. Nothing less would
satisfy his ambition.

With this view he gave himself airs very early; 'That his grandfather
and uncles were his stewards: that no man ever had better: that
daughters were but incumbrances and drawbacks upon a family:' and this
low and familiar expression was often in his mouth, and uttered always
with the self-complaisance which an imagined happy thought can be
supposed to give the speaker; to wit, 'That a man who has sons brings up
chickens for his own table,' [though once I made his comparison stagger
with him, by asking him, If the sons, to make it hold, were to have
their necks wrung off?] 'whereas daughters are chickens brought up
for tables of other men.' This, accompanied with the equally polite
reflection, 'That, to induce people to take them off their hands, the
family-stock must be impaired into the bargain,' used to put my sister
out of all patience: and, although she now seems to think a younger
sister only can be an incumbrance, she was then often proposing to me to
make a party in our own favour against my brother's rapacious views, as
she used to call them: while I was for considering the liberties he took
of this sort, as the effect of a temporary pleasantry, which, in a young
man, not naturally good-humoured, I was glad to see; or as a foible that
deserved raillery, but no other notice.

But when my grandfather's will (of the purport of which in my particular
favour, until it was opened, I was as ignorant as they) had lopped off
one branch of my brother's expectation, he was extremely dissatisfied
with me. Nobody indeed was pleased: for although every one loved me, yet
being the youngest child, father, uncles, brother, sister, all thought
themselves postponed, as to matter of right and power [Who loves not
power?]: And my father himself could not bear that I should be made
sole, as I may call it, and independent; for such the will, as to that
estate and the powers it gave, (unaccountably, as they all said,) made
me.

To obviate, therefore, every one's jealousy, I gave up to my father's
management, as you know, not only the estate, but the money bequeathed
me (which was a moiety of what my grandfather had by him at his death;
the other moiety being bequeathed to my sister); contenting myself
to take as from his bounty what he was pleased to allow me, without
desiring the least addition to my annual stipend. And then I hoped I had
laid all envy asleep: but still my brother and sister (jealous, as now
is evident, of my two uncles' favour of me, and of the pleasure I had
given my father and them by this act of duty) were every now-and-then
occasionally doing me covert ill offices: of which, however, I took the
less notice, when I was told of them, as I thought I had removed the
cause of their envy; and I imputed every thing of that sort to the
petulance they are both pretty much noted for.

My brother's acquisition then took place. This made us all very happy;
and he went down to take possession of it: and his absence (on so good
an account too) made us still happier. Then followed Lord M.'s proposal
for my sister: and this was an additional felicity for the time. I have
told you how exceedingly good-humoured it made my sister.

You know how that went off: you know what came on in its place.

My brother then returned; and we were all wrong again: and Bella, as
I observed in my letters abovementioned, had an opportunity to give
herself the credit of having refused Mr. Lovelace, on the score of his
reputed faulty morals. This united my brother and sister in one cause.
They set themselves on all occasions to depreciate Mr. Lovelace, and his
family too (a family which deserves nothing but respect): and this gave
rise to the conversation I am leading to, between my uncles and them: of
which I now come to give the particulars; after I have observed, that it
happened before the rencounter, and soon after the inquiry made into Mr.
Lovelace's affairs had come out better than my brother and sister hoped
it would.*


* See Letter IV.


They were bitterly inveighing against him, in their usual way,
strengthening their invectives with some new stories in his disfavour,
when my uncle Antony, having given them a patient hearing, declared,
'That he thought the gentleman behaved like a gentleman; his niece Clary
with prudence; and that a more honourable alliance for the family, as he
had often told them, could not be wished for: since Mr. Lovelace had a
very good paternal estate; and that, by the evidence of an enemy,
all clear. Nor did it appear, that he was so bad a man as he had been
represented to be: wild indeed; but it was a gay time of life: he was a
man of sense: and he was sure that his niece would not have him, if
she had not good reason to think him reformed, or that there was a
likelihood that she could reform him by her example.'

My uncle then gave one instance, my aunt told me, as a proof of a
generosity in Mr. Lovelace's spirit, which convinced him that he was not
a bad man in nature; and that he was of a temper, he was pleased to say,
like my own; which was, That when he (my uncle) had represented to him,
that he might, if he pleased, make three or four hundred pounds a year
of his paternal estate, more than he did; he answered, 'That his tenants
paid their rents well: that it was a maxim with his family, from which
he would by no means depart, Never to rack-rent old tenants, or their
descendants; and that it was a pleasure to him, to see all his tenants
look fat, sleek, and contented.'

I indeed had once occasionally heard him say something like this; and
thought he never looked so well as at that time;--except once; and that
was in an instance given by him on the following incident.

An unhappy tenant of my uncle Antony came petitioning to my uncle
for forbearance, in Mr. Lovelace's presence. When he had fruitlessly
withdrawn, Mr. Lovelace pleaded his cause so well, that the man was
called in again, and had his suit granted. And Mr. Lovelace privately
followed him out, and gave him two guineas, for present relief; the
man having declared, that, at the time, he had not five shilling in the
world.

On this occasion, he told my uncle (but without any airs of
ostentation), that he had once observed an old tenant and his wife in a
very mean habit at church; and questioning them about it the next day,
as he knew they had no hard bargain in their farm, the man said, he had
done some very foolish things with a good intention, which had put him
behind-hand, and he could not have paid his rent, and appear better.
He asked him how long it would take him to retrieve the foolish step
he acknowledged he had made. He said, Perhaps two or three years. Well
then, said he, I will abate you five pounds a year for seven years,
provided you will lay it upon your wife and self, that you may make a
Sunday-appearance like MY tenants. Mean time, take this (putting his
hand in his pocket, and giving him five guineas), to put yourselves in
present plight; and let me see you next Sunday at church, hand in hand,
like an honest and loving couple; and I bespeak you to dine with me
afterwards.

Although this pleased me when I heard it, as giving an instance of
generosity and prudence at the same time, not lessening (as my uncle
took notice) the yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I had no
throbs, no glows upon it!--Upon my word, I had not. Nevertheless I own
to you, that I could not help saying to myself on the occasion, 'Were it
ever to be my lot to have this man, he would not hinder me from pursuing
the methods I so much delight to take'--With 'A pity, that such a man
were not uniformly good!'

Forgive me this digression.

My uncle went on (as my aunt told me), 'That, besides his paternal
estate, he was the immediate heir to very splendid fortunes: that, when
he was in treaty for his niece Arabella, Lord M. told him (my uncle)
what great things he and his two half-sisters intended to do for him,
in order to qualify him for the title, which would be extinct at his
Lordship's death, and which they hoped to procure for him, or a still
higher, that of those ladies' father, which had been for some time
extinct on failure of heirs male: that it was with this view that his
relations were all so earnest for his marrying: that as he saw not
where Mr. Lovelace could better himself; so, truly, he thought there was
wealth enough in their own family to build up three considerable ones:
that, therefore, he must needs say, he was the more desirous of this
alliance, as there was a great probability, not only from Mr. Lovelace's
descent, but from his fortunes, that his niece Clarissa might one day
be a peeress of Great Britain:--and, upon that prospect [here was the
mortifying stroke], he should, for his own part, think it not wrong to
make such dispositions as should contribute to the better support of the
dignity.'

My uncle Harlowe, it seems, far from disapproving of what his brother
had said, declared, 'That there was but one objection to an alliance
with Mr. Lovelace; to wit, his faulty morals: especially as so much
could be done for Miss Bella, and for my brother too, by my father; and
as my brother was actually possessed of a considerable estate by virtue
of the deed of gift and will of his godmother Lovell.'

Had I known this before, I should the less have wondered at many things
I have been unable to account for in my brother's and sister's behaviour
to me; and been more on my guard than I imagined there was a necessity
to be.

You may easily guess how much this conversation affected my brother at
the time. He could not, you know, but be very uneasy to hear two of his
stewards talk at this rate to his face.

He had from early days, by his violent temper, made himself both feared
and courted by the whole family. My father himself, as I have lately
mentioned, very often (long before my brother's acquisition had made him
still more assuming) gave way to him, as to an only son who was to build
up the name, and augment the honour of it. Little inducement, therefore,
had my brother to correct a temper which gave him so much consideration
with every body.

'See, Sister Bella,' said he, in an indecent passion before my uncles,
on this occasion I have mentioned--'See how it is!--You and I ought to
look about us!--This little syren is in a fair way to out-uncle, as she
has already out-grandfather'd, us both!'

From this time (as I now find it plain upon recollection) did my brother
and sister behave to me, as to one who stood in their way; and to each
other as having but one interest: and were resolved, therefore, to bend
all their force to hinder an alliance from taking effect, which they
believed was likely to oblige them to contract their views.

And how was this to be done, after such a declaration from both my
uncles?

My brother found out the way. My sister (as I have said) went hand in
hand with him. Between them, the family union was broke, and every one
was made uneasy. Mr. Lovelace was received more and more coldly by all:
but not being to be put out of his course by slights only, personal
affronts succeeded; defiances next; then the rencounter: that, as you
have heard, did the business. And now, if I do not oblige them, my
grandfather's estate is to be litigated with me; and I, who never
designed to take advantage of the independency bequeathed me, am to be
as dependent upon my father's will, as a daughter ought to be who knows
not what is good for herself. This is the language of the family now.

But if I will suffer myself to be prevailed upon, how happy (as they lay
it out) shall we all be!--Such presents am I to have, such jewels, and
I cannot tell what, from every one in the family! Then Mr. Solmes's
fortunes are so great, and his proposals so very advantageous, (no
relation whom he values,) that there will be abundant room to raise
mine upon them, were the high-intended favours of my own relations to
be quite out of the question. Moreover, it is now, with this view,
found out, that I have qualifications which of themselves will be a full
equivalent to Mr. Solmes for the settlements he is to make; and still
leave him under an obligation to me for my compliance. He himself thinks
so, I am told--so very poor a creature is he, even in his own eyes, as
well as in theirs.

These desirable views answered, how rich, how splendid shall we all
three be! And I--what obligations shall I lay upon them all!--And that
only by doing an act of duty so suitable to my character, and manner of
thinking; if, indeed, I am the generous as well as dutiful creature I
have hitherto made them believe I am.

This is the bright side that is turned to my father and uncles, to
captivate them: but I am afraid that my brother's and sister's design is
to ruin me with them at any rate. Were it otherwise, would they not on
my return from you have rather sought to court than frighten me into
measures which their hearts are so much bent to carry? A method they
have followed ever since.

Mean time, orders are given to all the servants to shew the highest
respect to Mr. Solmes; the generous Mr. Solmes is now his character with
some of our family! But are not these orders a tacit confession,
that they think his own merit will not procure him respect? He is
accordingly, in every visit he makes, not only highly caressed by the
principals of our family, but obsequiously attended and cringed to by
the menials.--And the noble settlements are echoed from every mouth.

Noble is the word used to enforce the offers of a man who is mean enough
avowedly to hate, and wicked enough to propose to rob of their just
expectations, his own family, (every one of which at the same time
stands in too much need of his favour,) in order to settle all he is
worth upon me; and if I die without children, and he has none by any
other marriage, upon a family which already abounds. Such are his
proposals.

But were there no other motive to induce me to despise the upstart man,
is not this unjust one to his family enough?--The upstart man, I repeat;
for he was not born to the immense riches he is possessed of: riches
left by one niggard to another, in injury to the next heir, because that
other is a niggard. And should I not be as culpable, do you think, in my
acceptance of such unjust settlements, as he is in the offer of them, if
I could persuade myself to be a sharer in them, or suffer a reversionary
expectation of possessing them to influence my choice?

Indeed, it concerns me not a little, that my friends could be brought to
encourage such offers on such motives as I think a person of conscience
should not presume to begin the world with.

But this it seems is the only method that can be taken to disappoint Mr.
Lovelace; and at the same time to answer all my relations have wish for
each of us. And surely I will not stand against such an accession to the
family as may happen from marrying Mr. Solmes: since now a possibility
is discovered, (which such a grasping mind as my brother's can easily
turn into a probability,) that my grandfather's estate will revert to
it, with a much more considerable one of the man's own. Instances of
estates falling in, in cases far more unlikely than this, are insisted
upon; and my sister says, in the words of an old saw, It is good to be
related to an estate.

While Solmes, smiling no doubt to himself at a hope so remote, by offers
only, obtains all their interests; and doubts not to join to his own
the estate I am envied for; which, for the conveniency of its situation
between two of his, will it seems be of twice the value to him that
it would be of to any other person; and is therefore, I doubt not, a
stronger motive with him than the wife.

These, my dear, seem to me the principal inducements of my relations to
espouse so vehemently as they do this man's suit. And here, once more,
must I deplore the family fault, which gives those inducements such a
force as it will be difficult to resist.

And thus far, let matters with regard to Mr. Solmes and me come out as
they will, my brother has succeeded in his views; that is to say, he
has, in the first place, got my FATHER to make the cause his own, and to
insist upon my compliance as an act of duty.

My MOTHER has never thought fit to oppose my father's will, when once he
has declared himself determined.

My UNCLES, stiff, unbroken, highly-prosperous bachelors, give me leave
to say, (though very worthy persons in the main,) have as high notions
of a child's duty, as of a wife's obedience; in the last of which, my
mother's meekness has confirmed them, and given them greater reason to
expect the first.

My aunt HERVEY (not extremely happy in her own nuptials, and perhaps
under some little obligation) is got over, and chuses [sic] not to
open her lips in my favour against the wills of a father and uncles so
determined.

This passiveness in my mother and in my aunt, in a point so contrary
to their own first judgments, is too strong a proof that my father is
absolutely resolved.

Their treatment of my worthy MRS. NORTON is a sad confirmation of it:
a woman deserving of all consideration for her wisdom, and every body
thinking so; but who, not being wealthy enough to have due weight in a
point against which she has given her opinion, and which they seem
bent upon carrying, is restrained from visiting here, and even from
corresponding with me, as I am this very day informed.

Hatred to Lovelace, family aggrandizement, and this great motive
paternal authority!--What a force united must they be supposed to have,
when singly each consideration is sufficient to carry all before it!

This is the formidable appearance which the address of this disagreeable
man wears at present.

My BROTHER and my SISTER triumph.--They have got me down, as Hannah
overheard them exult. And so they have (yet I never knew that I
was insolently up); for now my brother will either lay me under an
obligation to comply to my own unhappiness, and so make me an instrument
of his revenge upon Lovelace; or, if I refuse, will throw me into
disgrace with my whole family.

Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried on by undermining
courtiers against one another, when a private family, but three of which
can possibly have clashing interests, and one of them (as she presumes
to think) above such low motives, cannot be free from them?

What at present most concerns me, is, the peace of my mother's mind!
How can the husband of such a wife (a good man too!--But oh! this
prerogative of manhood!) be so positive, so unpersuadable, to one who
has brought into the family means, which they know so well the value of,
that methinks they should value her the more for their sake?

They do indeed value her: but, I am sorry to say, she has purchased
that value by her compliances; yet has merit for which she ought to be
venerated; prudence which ought of itself to be conformed to in every
thing.

But whither roves my pen? How dare a perverse girl take these liberties
with relations so very respectable, and whom she highly respects? What
an unhappy situation is that which obliges her, in her own defence as it
were, to expose their failings?

But you, who know how much I love and reverence my mother, will judge
what a difficulty I am under, to be obliged to oppose a scheme which she
has engaged in. Yet I must oppose it (to comply is impossible); and must
without delay declare my opposition, or my difficulties will increase;
since, as I am just now informed, a lawyer has been this very day
consulted [Would you have believed it?] in relation to settlements.

Were ours a Roman Catholic family, how much happier for me, that they
thought a nunnery would answer all their views!--How happy, had not
a certain person slighted somebody! All then would have been probably
concluded between them before my brother had arrived to thwart
the match: then had I a sister; which now I have not; and two
brothers;--both aspiring; possibly both titled: while I should only have
valued that in either which is above title, that which is truly noble in
both!

But by what a long-reaching selfishness is my brother governed! By what
remote, exceedingly remote views! Views, which it is in the power of the
slightest accident, of a fever, for instance, (the seeds of which are
always vegetating, as I may say, and ready to burst forth, in his own
impetuous temper,) or of the provoked weapon of an adversary, to blow up
and destroy!

I will break off here. Let me write ever so freely of my friends, I am
sure of your kind construction: and I confide in your discretion, that
you will avoid reading to or transcribing for others such passages as
may have the appearance of treating too freely the parental, or even the
fraternal character, or induce others to censure for a supposed failure
in duty to the one, or decency to the other,

Your truly affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY EVENING, MARCH 2.


On Hannah's depositing my long letter, (begun yesterday, but by reason
of several interruptions not finished till within this hour,) she found
and brought me yours of this day. I thank you, my dear, for this kind
expedition. These few lines will perhaps be time enough deposited, to be
taken away by your servant with the other letter: yet they are only to
thank you, and to tell you my increasing apprehensions.

I must take or seek the occasion to apply to my mother for her
mediation; for I am in danger of having a day fixed, and antipathy taken
for bashfulness.--Should not sisters be sisters to each other? Should
not they make a common cause of it, as I may say, a cause of sex, on
such occasions as the present? Yet mine, in support of my brother's
selfishness, and, no doubt, in concert with him, has been urging in full
assembly it seems, (and that with an earnestness peculiar to herself
when she sets upon any thing,) that an absolute day be given me; and if
I comply not, to be told, that it shall be to the forfeiture of all my
fortunes, and of all their love.

She need not be so officious: my brother's interest, without hers, is
strong enough; for he has found means to confederate all the family
against me. Upon some fresh provocation, or new intelligence concerning
Mr. Lovelace, (I know not what it is,) they have bound themselves, or
are to bind themselves, by a signed paper, to one another [The Lord
bless me, my dear, what shall I do!] to carry their point in favour of
Mr. Solmes, in support of my father's authority, as it is called, and
against Mr. Lovelace, as a libertine, and an enemy to the family: and if
so, I am sure, I may say against me.--How impolitic in them all, to join
two people in one interest, whom they wish for ever to keep asunder!

What the discharged steward reported of him is surely bad enough: what
Mrs. Fortescue said, not only confirms that bad, but gives room to think
him still worse. And yet the something further which my friends have
come at, is of so heinous a nature (as Betty Barnes tells Hannah) that
it proves him almost to be the worst of men.--But, hang the man, I
had almost said--What is he to me? What would he be--were not this Mr.
Sol----O my dear, how I hate the man in the light he is proposed to me!

All of them, at the same time, are afraid of Mr. Lovelace; yet not
afraid to provoke him!--How am I entangled!--to be obliged to go on
corresponding with him for their sakes--Heaven forbid, that their
persisted-in violence should so drive me, as to make it necessary for my
own!

But surely they will yield--Indeed I cannot.

I believe the gentlest spirits when provoked (causelessly and cruelly
provoked) are the most determined. The reason may be, that not taking
up resolutions lightly--their very deliberation makes them the more
immovable.--And then when a point is clear and self-evident, how can
one with patience think of entering into an argument or contention upon
it?--

An interruption obliges me to conclude myself, in some hurry, as well as
fright, what I must ever be,

Yours more than my own, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE FRIDAY, MARCH 3.


I have both your letters at once. It is very unhappy, my dear, since
your friends will have you marry, that a person of your merit should be
addressed by a succession of worthless creatures, who have nothing but
their presumption for their excuse.

That these presumers appear not in this very unworthy light to some of
your friends, is, because their defects are not so striking to them
as to others.--And why? Shall I venture to tell you?--Because they are
nearer their own standard--Modesty, after all, perhaps has a concern in
it; for how should they think that a niece or sister of theirs [I will
not go higher, for fear of incurring your displeasure] should be an
angel?

But where indeed is the man to be found (who has the least share of due
diffidence) that dares to look up to Miss Clarissa Harlowe with hope, or
with any thing but wishes? Thus the bold and forward, not being sensible
of their defects, aspire; while the modesty of the really worthy fills
them with too much reverence to permit them to explain themselves. Hence
your Symmes's, your Byron's, your Mullins's, your Wyerley's (the best
of the herd), and your Solmes's, in turn, invade you--Wretches that,
looking upon the rest of your family, need not despair of succeeding in
an alliance with it--But to you, what an inexcusable presumption!

Yet I am afraid all opposition will be in vain. You must, you will, I
doubt, be sacrificed to this odious man. I know your family. There will
be no resisting such baits as he has thrown out. O, my dear, my beloved
friend! and are such charming qualities, is such exalted merit, to be
sunk in such a marriage!--You must not, your uncle tells your mother,
dispute their authority. AUTHORITY! what a full word is that in the
mouth of a narrow-minded person, who happened to be born thirty years
before one!--Of your uncles I speak; for as to the paternal authority,
that ought to be sacred.--But should not parents have reason for what
they do?

Wonder not, however, at your Bell's unsisterly behaviour in this affair:
I have a particular to add to the inducements your insolent brother is
governed by, which will account for all her driving. You have already
owned, that her outward eye was from the first struck with the figure
and address of the man whom she pretends to despise, and who, 'tis
certain, thoroughly despises her: but you have not told me, that still
she loves him of all men. Bell has a meanness in her very pride; that
meanness rises with her pride, and goes hand in hand with it; and no
one is so proud as Bell. She has owned her love, her uneasy days,
and sleepless nights, and her revenge grafted upon her love, to her
favourite Betty Barnes--To lay herself in the power of a servant's
tongue! Poor creature!--But LIKE little souls will find one another
out, and mingle, as well as LIKE great ones. This, however, she told the
wench in strict confidence: and thus, by way of the female round-about,
as Lovelace had the sauciness on such another occasion, in ridicule of
our sex, to call it, Betty (pleased to be thought worthy of a secret,
and to have an opportunity of inveighing against Lovelace's perfidy,
as she would have it to be) told it to one of her confidants:
that confidant, with like injunctions of secrecy, to Miss Lloyd's
Harriot--Harriot to Miss Lloyd--Miss Lloyd to me--I to you--with leave
to make what you please of it.

And now you will not wonder to find Miss Bell an implacable rival,
rather than an affectionate sister; and will be able to account for the
words witchcraft, syren, and such like, thrown out against you; and for
her driving on for a fixed day for sacrificing you to Solmes: in short,
for her rudeness and violence of every kind.

What a sweet revenge will she take, as well upon Lovelace as upon you,
if she can procure her rival sister to be married to the man that sister
hates; and so prevent her having the man whom she herself loves (whether
she have hope of him or not), and whom she suspects her sister loves!

Poisons and poniard have often been set to work by minds inflamed by
disappointed love, and actuated by revenge.--Will you wonder, then, that
the ties of relationship in such a case have no force, and that a sister
forgets to be a sister?

Now I know this to be her secret motive, (the more grating to her, as
her pride is concerned to make her disavow it), and can consider it
joined with her former envy, and as strengthened by a brother, who has
such an ascendant over the whole family; and whose interest (slave to it
as he always was) engaged him to ruin you with every one: both possessed
of the ears of all your family, and having it as much in their power as
in their will to misrepresent all you say, all you do; such subject also
as to the rencounter, and Lovelace's want of morals, to expatiate upon:
your whole family likewise avowedly attached to the odious man by means
of the captivating proposals he has made them;--when I consider all
these things, I am full of apprehensions for you.--O my dear, how will
you be able to maintain your ground;--I am sure, (alas! I am too sure)
that they will subdue such a fine spirit as yours, unused to opposition;
and (tell it not in Gath) you must be Mrs. Solmes!

Mean time, it is now easy, as you will observe, to guess from what
quarter the report I mentioned to you in one of my former, came,
That the younger sister has robbed the elder of her lover:* for Betty
whispered it, at the time she whispered the rest, that neither Lovelace
nor you had done honourably by her young mistress.--How cruel, my dear,
in you, to rob the poor Bella of the only lover she only had!--At the
instant too that she was priding herself, that now at last she should
have it in her power not only to gratify her own susceptibilities, but
to give an example to the flirts of her sex** (my worship's self in
her eye) how to govern their man with a silken rein, and without a
curb-bridle!


     * Letter I.

     ** Letter II.


Upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their persevering in favour of
the despicable Solmes; and of their dependence upon the gentleness of
your temper, and the regard you have for their favour, and for your own
reputation. And now I am more than ever convinced of the propriety of
the advice I formerly gave you, to keep in your own hands the estate
bequeathed to you by your grandfather.--Had you done so, it would have
procured you at least an outward respect from your brother and sister,
which would have made them conceal the envy and ill-will that now are
bursting upon you from hearts so narrow.

I must harp a little more upon this string--Do not you observe, how much
your brother's influence has overtopped yours, since he has got into
fortunes so considerable, and since you have given some of them an
appetite to continue in themselves the possession of your estate, unless
you comply with their terms?

I know your dutiful, your laudable motives; and one would have thought,
that you might have trusted to a father who so dearly loved you. But had
you been actually in possession of that estate, and living up to it, and
upon it, (your youth protected from blighting tongues by the company
of your prudent Norton, as you had proposed,) do you think that your
brother, grudging it to you at the time as he did, and looking upon it
as his right as an only son, would have been practising about it, and
aiming at it? I told you some time ago, that I thought your trials but
proportioned to your prudence:* but you will be more than woman, if
you can extricate yourself with honour, having such violent spirits and
sordid minds in some, and such tyrannical and despotic wills in others,
to deal with. Indeed, all may be done, and the world be taught further
to admire you for your blind duty and will-less resignation, if you can
persuade yourself to be Mrs. Solmes.


     * Letter I.


I am pleased with the instances you give me of Mr. Lovelace's
benevolence to his own tenants, and with his little gift to your
uncle's. Mrs. Fortescue allows him to be the best of landlords: I might
have told you that, had I thought it necessary to put you into some
little conceit of him. He has qualities, in short, that may make him
a tolerable creature on the other side of fifty: but God help the
poor woman to whose lot he shall fall till then! women, I should say,
perhaps; since he may break half-a-dozen hearts before that time.--But
to the point I was upon--Shall we not have reason to commend the
tenant's grateful honesty, if we are told, that with joy the poor man
called out your uncle, and on the spot paid him in part of his debt
those two guineas?--But what shall we say of that landlord, who, though
he knew the poor man to be quite destitute, could take it; and, saying
nothing while Mr. Lovelace staid, as soon as he was gone, tell of it in
praise of the poor fellow's honesty?--Were this so, and were not that
landlord related to my dearest friend, how should I despise such a
wretch?--But, perhaps, the story is aggravated. Covetous people have
every one's ill word: and so indeed they ought; because they are
only solicitous to keep that which they prefer to every one's good
one.--Covetous indeed would they be, who deserved neither, yet expected
both!

I long for your next letter. Continue to be as particular as possible.
I can think of no other subject but what relates to you and to your
affairs: for I am, and ever will be, most affectionately,

Your own, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [HER PRECEDING NOT AT THAT TIME
RECEIVED.] FRIDAY, MARCH 3.


O my dear friend, I have had a sad conflict! Trial upon trial;
conference upon conference!--But what law, what ceremony, can give a
man a right to a heart which abhors him more than it does any living
creature?

I hope my mother will be able to prevail for me.--But I will recount it
all, though I sit up the whole night to do it; for I have a vast deal to
write, and will be as minute as you wish me to be.

I concluded my last in a fright. It was occasioned by a conversation
that passed between my mother and my aunt, part of which Hannah
overheard. I need not give you the particulars; since what I have to
relate to you from different conversations that have passed between my
mother and me, in the space of a very few hours, will include them all.
I will begin then.

I went down this morning when breakfast was ready with a very uneasy
heart, from what Hannah had informed me of yesterday afternoon; wishing
for an opportunity, however, to appeal to my mother, in hopes to engage
her interest in my behalf, and purposing to try to find one when she
retired to her own apartment after breakfast: but, unluckily, there was
the odious Solmes, sitting asquat between my mother and sister, with so
much assurance in his looks!--But you know, my dear, that those we love
not, cannot do any thing to please us.

Had the wretch kept his seat, it might have been well enough: but the
bend and broad-shouldered creature must needs rise, and stalk towards a
chair, which was just by that which was set for me.

I removed it to a distance, as if to make way to my own: and down I sat,
abruptly I believe; what I had heard all in my head.

But this was not enough to daunt him. The man is a very confident, he is
a very bold, staring man!--Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident.

He took the removed chair, and drew it so near mine, squatting in it
with his ugly weight, that he pressed upon my hoop.--I was so offended
(all I had heard, as I said, in my head) that I removed to another
chair. I own I had too little command of myself. It gave my brother
and sister too much advantage. I day say they took it. But I did it
involuntarily, I think. I could not help it.--I knew not what I did.

I saw that my father was excessively displeased. When angry, no man's
countenance ever shews it so much as my father's. Clarissa Harlowe! said
he with a big voice--and there he stopped. Sir! said I, trembling and
courtesying (for I had not then sat down again); and put my chair nearer
the wretch, and sat down--my face, as I could feel, all in a glow.

Make tea, child, said my kind mamma; sit by me, love, and make tea.

I removed with pleasure to the seat the man had quitted; and being
thus indulgently put into employment, soon recovered myself; and in the
course of the breakfasting officiously asked two or three questions
of Mr. Solmes, which I would not have done, but to make up with my
father.--Proud spirits may be brought to! Whisperingly spoke my sister
to me, over her shoulder, with an air of triumph and scorn: but I did
not mind her.

My mother was all kindness and condescension. I asked her once, if she
were pleased with the tea? She said, softly, (and again called me dear,)
she was pleased with all I did. I was very proud of this encouraging
goodness: and all blew over, as I hoped, between my father and me; for
he also spoke kindly to me two or three times.

Small accidents these, my dear, to trouble you with; only as they lead
to greater, as you shall hear.

Before the usual breakfast-time was over, my father withdrew with my
mother, telling her he wanted to speak with her. Then my sister and next
my aunt (who was with us) dropt away.

My brother gave himself some airs of insult, which I understood well
enough; but which Mr. Solmes could make nothing of: and at last he arose
from his seat--Sister, said he, I have a curiosity to shew you. I will
fetch it. And away he went shutting the door close after him.

I saw what all this was for. I arose; the man hemming up for a speech,
rising, and beginning to set his splay-feet [indeed, my dear, the man in
all his ways is hateful to me] in an approaching posture.--I will
save my brother the trouble of bringing to me his curiosity, said I. I
courtesied--Your servant, sir--The man cried, Madam, Madam, twice, and
looked like a fool.--But away I went--to find my brother, to save my
word.--But my brother, indifferent as the weather was, was gone to
walk in the garden with my sister. A plain case, that he had left his
curiosity with me, and designed to shew me no other.

I had but just got into my own apartment, and began to think of sending
Hannah to beg an audience of my mother (the more encouraged by her
condescending goodness at breakfast) when Shorey, her woman, brought me
her commands to attend me in her closet.

My father, Hannah told me, was just gone out of it with a positive angry
countenance. Then I as much dreaded the audience as I had wished for it
before.

I went down however; but, apprehending the subject she intended to
talk to me upon, approached her trembling, and my heart in visible
palpitations.

She saw my concern. Holding out her kind arms, as she sat, Come kiss
me, my dear, said she, with a smile like a sun-beam breaking through
the cloud that overshadowed her naturally benign aspect--Why flutters my
jewel so?

This preparative sweetness, with her goodness just before, confirmed my
apprehensions. My mother saw the bitter pill wanted gilding.

O my Mamma! was all I could say; and I clasped my arms round her neck,
and my face sunk into her bosom.

My child! my child! restrain, said she, your powers of moving! I dare
not else trust myself with you.--And my tears trickled down her bosom,
as hers bedewed my neck.

O the words of kindness, all to be expressed in vain, that flowed from
her lips!

Lift up your sweet face, my best child, my own Clarissa Harlowe!--O my
daughter, best beloved of my heart, lift up a face so ever amiable to
me!--Why these sobs?--Is an apprehended duty so affecting a thing, that
before I can speak--But I am glad, my love, you can guess at what I have
to say to you. I am spared the pains of breaking to you what was a task
upon me reluctantly enough undertaken to break to you. Then rising, she
drew a chair near her own, and made me sit down by her, overwhelmed as I
was with tears of apprehension of what she had to say, and of gratitude
for her truly maternal goodness to me--sobs still my only language.

And drawing her chair still nearer to mine, she put her arms round my
neck, and my glowing cheek wet with my tears, close to her own: Let me
talk to you, my child. Since silence is your choice, hearken to me, and
be silent.

You know, my dear, what I every day forego, and undergo, for the sake of
peace. Your papa is a very good man, and means well; but he will not
be controuled; nor yet persuaded. You have sometimes seemed to pity me,
that I am obliged to give up every point. Poor man! his reputation the
less for it; mine the greater: yet would I not have this credit, if
I could help it, at so dear a rate to him and to myself. You are a
dutiful, a prudent, and a wise child, she was pleased to say, in hope,
no doubt, to make me so: you would not add, I am sure, to my trouble:
you would not wilfully break that peace which costs your mother so much
to preserve. Obedience is better than sacrifice. O my Clary Harlowe,
rejoice my heart, by telling me that I have apprehended too much!--I see
your concern! I see your perplexity! I see your conflict! [loosing
her arm, and rising, not willing I should see how much she herself
was affected]. I will leave you a moment.--Answer me not--[for I was
essaying to speak, and had, as soon as she took her dear cheek from
mine, dropt down on my knees, my hands clasped, and lifted up in
a supplicating manner]--I am not prepared for your irresistible
expostulation, she was pleased to say. I will leave you to recollection:
and I charge you, on my blessing, that all this my truly maternal
tenderness be not thrown away upon you.

And then she withdrew into the next apartment; wiping her eyes as she
went from me; as mine overflowed; my heart taking in the whole compass
of her meaning.

She soon returned, having recovered more steadiness.

Still on my knees, I had thrown my face across the chair she had sat in.

Look up to me, my Clary Harlowe--No sullenness, I hope!

No, indeed, my ever-to-be-revered Mamma.--And I arose. I bent my knee.

She raised me. No kneeling to me, but with knees of duty and compliance.
Your heart, not your knees, must bend. It is absolutely determined.
Prepare yourself therefore to receive your father, when he visits you
by-and-by, as he would wish to receive you. But on this one quarter of
an hour depends the peace of my future life, the satisfaction of all the
family, and your own security from a man of violence: and I charge you
besides, on my blessing, that you think of being Mrs. Solmes.

There went the dagger to my heart, and down I sunk: and when I
recovered, found myself in the arms of my Hannah, my sister's Betty
holding open my reluctantly-opened palm, my laces cut, my linen scented
with hartshorn; and my mother gone. Had I been less kindly treated, the
hated name still forborne to be mentioned, or mentioned with a little
more preparation and reserve, I had stood the horrid sound with less
visible emotion--But to be bid, on the blessing of a mother so dearly
beloved, so truly reverenced, to think of being MRS. SOLMES--what a
denunciation was that!

Shorey came in with a message (delivered in her solemn way): Your mamma,
Miss, is concerned for your disorder: she expects you down again in an
hour; and bid me say, that she then hopes every thing from your duty.

I made no reply; for what could I say? And leaning upon my Hannah's arm,
withdrew to my own apartment. There you will guess how the greatest part
of the hour was employed.

Within that time, my mother came up to me.

I love, she was pleased to say, to come into this apartment.--No
emotions, child! No flutters!--Am I not your mother?--Do not discompose
me by discomposing yourself! Do not occasion me uneasiness, when I
would give you nothing but pleasure. Come, my dear, we will go into your
closet.

She took my hand, led the way, and made me sit down by her: and after
she had inquired how I did, she began in a strain as if she supposed I
had made use of the intervening space to overcome all my objections.

She was pleased to tell me, that my father and she, in order to spare my
natural modesty, had taken the whole affair upon themselves--

Hear me out; and then speak.--He is not indeed every thing I wish him to
be: but he is a man of probity, and has no vices--

No vices, Madam--!

Hear me out, child.--You have not behaved much amiss to him: we have
seen with pleasure that you have not--

O Madam, must I not now speak!

I shall have done presently.--A young creature of your virtuous and
pious turn, she was pleased to say, cannot surely love a profligate: you
love your brother too well, to wish to marry one who had like to have
killed him, and who threatened your uncles, and defies us all. You have
had your own way six or seven times: we want to secure you against a man
so vile. Tell me (I have a right to know) whether you prefer this man
to all others?--Yet God forbid that I should know you do; for such
a declaration would make us all miserable. Yet tell me, are your
affections engaged to this man?

I knew not what the inference would be, if I said they were not.

You hesitate--You answer me not--You cannot answer me.--Rising--Never
more will I look upon you with an eye of favour--

O Madam, Madam! Kill me not with your displeasure--I would not, I need
not, hesitate one moment, did I not dread the inference, if I answer
you as you wish.--Yet be that inference what it will, your threatened
displeasure will make me speak. And I declare to you, that I know not my
own heart, if it not be absolutely free. And pray, let me ask my dearest
Mamma, in what has my conduct been faulty, that, like a giddy creature,
I must be forced to marry, to save me from--From what? Let me beseech
you, Madam, to be the guardian of my reputation! Let not your Clarissa
be precipitated into a state she wishes not to enter into with any man!
And this upon a supposition that otherwise she shall marry herself, and
disgrace her whole family.

Well then, Clary [passing over the force of my plea] if your heart be
free--

O my beloved Mamma, let the usual generosity of your dear heart operate
in my favour. Urge not upon me the inference that made me hesitate.

I won't be interrupted, Clary--You have seen in my behaviour to you,
on this occasion, a truly maternal tenderness; you have observed that
I have undertaken the task with some reluctance, because the man is not
every thing; and because I know you carry your notions of perfection in
a man too high--

Dearest Madam, this one time excuse me!--Is there then any danger that I
should be guilty of an imprudent thing for the man's sake you hint at?

Again interrupted!--Am I to be questioned, and argued with? You know
this won't do somewhere else. You know it won't. What reason then,
ungenerous girl, can you have for arguing with me thus, but because you
think from my indulgence to you, you may?

What can I say? What can I do? What must that cause be that will not
bear being argued upon?

Again! Clary Harlowe!

Dearest Madam, forgive me: it was always my pride and my pleasure to
obey you. But look upon that man--see but the disagreeableness of his
person--

Now, Clary, do I see whose person you have in your eye!--Now is Mr.
Solmes, I see, but comparatively disagreeable; disagreeable only as
another man has a much more specious person

But, Madam, are not his manners equally so?--Is not his person the true
representative of his mind?--That other man is not, shall not be, any
thing to me, release me but from this one man, whom my heart, unbidden,
resists.

Condition thus with your father. Will he bear, do you think, to be thus
dialogued with? Have I not conjured you, as you value my peace--What
is it that I do not give up?--This very task, because I apprehended you
would not be easily persuaded, is a task indeed upon me. And will you
give up nothing? Have you not refused as many as have been offered to
you? If you would not have us guess for whom, comply; for comply you
must, or be looked upon as in a state of defiance with your whole
family.

And saying this, she arose and went from me. But at the chamber-door
stopt; and turned back: I will not say below in what a disposition I
leave you. Consider of every thing. The matter is resolved upon. As you
value your father's blessing and mine, and the satisfaction of all the
family, resolve to comply. I will leave you for a few moments. I will
come up to you again. See that I find you as I wish to find you; and
since your heart is free, let your duty govern it.

In about half an hour, my mother returned. She found me in tears.
She took my hand: It is my part evermore, said she, to be of the
acknowledging side. I believe I have needlessly exposed myself to your
opposition, by the method I have taken with you. I first began as if I
expected a denial, and by my indulgence brought it upon myself.

Do not, my dearest Mamma! do not say so!

Were the occasion for this debate, proceeded she, to have risen from
myself; were it in my power to dispense with your compliance; you too
well know what you can do with me.

Would any body, my dear Miss Howe, wish to marry, who sees a wife of
such a temper, and blessed with such an understanding as my mother is
noted for, not only deprived of all power, but obliged to be even active
in bringing to bear a point of high importance, which she thinks ought
not to be insisted upon?

When I came to you a second time, proceeded she, knowing that your
opposition would avail you nothing, I refused to hear your reasons: and
in this I was wrong too, because a young creature who loves to reason,
and used to love to be convinced by reason, ought to have all her
objections heard: I now therefore, this third time, see you; and am
come resolved to hear all you have to say: and let me, my dear, by my
patience engage your gratitude; your generosity, I will call it, because
it is to you I speak, who used to have a mind wholly generous.--Let me,
if your heart be really free, let me see what it will induce you to do
to oblige me: and so as you permit your usual discretion to govern you,
I will hear all you have to say; but with this intimation, that say what
you will, it will be of no avail elsewhere.

What a dreadful saying is that! But could I engage your pity, Madam, it
would be somewhat.

You have as much of my pity as of my love. But what is person, Clary,
with one of your prudence, and your heart disengaged?

Should the eye be disgusted, when the heart is to be engaged?--O
Madam, who can think of marrying when the heart is shocked at the
first appearance, and where the disgust must be confirmed by every
conversation afterwards?

This, Clary, is owing to your prepossession. Let me not have cause
to regret that noble firmness of mind in so young a creature which I
thought your glory, and which was my boast in your character. In this
instance it would be obstinacy, and want of duty.--Have you not made
objections to several--

That was to their minds, to their principles, Madam.--But this man--

Is an honest man, Clary Harlowe. He has a good mind. He is a virtuous
man.

He an honest man? His a good mind, Madam? He a virtuous man?--

Nobody denies these qualities.

Can he be an honest man who offers terms that will rob all his own
relations of their just expectations?--Can his mind be good--

You, Clary Harlowe, for whose sake he offers so much, are the last
person who should make this observation.

Give me leave to say, Madam, that a person preferring happiness to
fortune, as I do; that want not even what I have, and can give up the
use of that, as an instance of duty--

No more, no more of your merits!--You know you will be a gainer by that
cheerful instance of your duty; not a loser. You know you have but
cast your bread upon the waters--so no more of that!--For it is not
understood as a merit by every body, I assure you; though I think it a
high one; and so did your father and uncles at the time--

At the time, Madam!--How unworthily do my brother and sister, who are
afraid that the favour I was so lately in--

I hear nothing against your brother and sister--What family feuds have I
in prospect, at a time when I hoped to have most comfort from you all!


God bless my brother and sister in all their worthy views! You shall
have no family feuds if I can prevent them. You yourself, Madam, shall
tell me what I shall bear from them, and I will bear it: but let my
actions, not their misrepresentations (as I am sure by the disgraceful
prohibitions I have met with has been the case) speak for me.

Just then, up came my father, with a sternness in his looks that made me
tremble.--He took two or three turns about my chamber, though pained by
his gout; and then said to my mother, who was silent as soon as she saw
him--

My dear, you are long absent.--Dinner is near ready. What you had to
say, lay in a very little compass. Surely, you have nothing to do but
to declare your will, and my will--But perhaps you may be talking of the
preparations--Let us have you soon down--Your daughter in your hand, if
worthy of the name.

And down he went, casting his eye upon me with a look so stern, that
I was unable to say one word to him, or even for a few minutes to my
mother.

Was not this very intimidating, my dear?

My mother, seeing my concern, seemed to pity me. She called me her good
child, and kissed me; and told me that my father should not know I had
made such opposition. He has kindly furnished us with an excuse for
being so long together, said she.--Come, my dear--dinner will be upon
table presently--Shall we go down?--And took my hand.

This made me start: What, Madam, go down to let it be supposed we were
talking of preparations!--O my beloved Mamma, command me not down upon
such a supposition.

You see, child, that to stay longer together, will be owning that you
are debating about an absolute duty; and that will not be borne. Did not
your father himself some days ago tell you, he would be obeyed? I will a
third time leave you. I must say something by way of excuse for you:
and that you desire not to go down to dinner--that your modesty on the
occasion--

O Madam! say not my modesty on such an occasion: for that will be to
give hope--

And design you not to give hope?--Perverse girl!--Rising and flinging
from me; take more time for consideration!--Since it is necessary, take
more time--and when I see you next, let me know what blame I have to
cast upon myself, or to bear from your father, for my indulgence to you.

She made, however, a little stop at the chamber-door; and seemed to
expect that I would have besought her to make the gentlest construction
for me; for, hesitating, she was pleased to say, I suppose you would not
have me make a report--

O Madam, interrupted I, whose favour can I hope for if I lose my
mamma's?

To have desired a favourable report, you know, my dear, would have been
qualifying upon a point that I was too much determined upon, to give
room for any of my friends to think I have the least hesitation about
it. And so my mother went down stairs.

I will deposit thus far; and, as I know you will not think me too minute
in the relation of particulars so very interesting to one you honour
with your love, proceed in the same way. As matters stand, I don't care
to have papers, so freely written, about me.

Pray let Robert call every day, if you can spare him, whether I have any
thing ready or not.

I should be glad you would not send him empty handed. What a generosity
will it be in you, to write as frequently from friendship, as I am
forced to do from misfortune! The letters being taken away will be an
assurance that you have them. As I shall write and deposit as I have
opportunity, the formality of super and sub-scription will be excused.
For I need not say how much I am

Your sincere and ever affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


My mother, on her return, which was as soon as she had dined, was
pleased to inform me, that she told my father, on his questioning her
about my cheerul compliance (for, it seems, the cheerful was all that
was doubted) that she was willing, on so material a point, to give
a child whom she had so much reason to love (as she condescended to
acknowledge were her words) liberty to say all that was in her heart to
say, that her compliance might be the freer: letting him know, that
when he came up, she was attending to my pleas; for that she found I had
rather not marry at all.

She told me, that to this my father angrily said, let her take
care--let her take care--that she give me not ground to suspect her of
a preference somewhere else. But, if it be to ease her heart, and not to
dispute my will, you may hear her out.

So, Clary, said my mother, I am returned in a temper accordingly: and I
hope you will not again, by your peremptoriness, shew me how I ought to
treat you.

Indeed, Madam, you did me justice to say, I have no inclination to marry
at all. I have not, I hope, made myself so very unuseful in my papa's
family, as--

No more of your merits, Clary! You have been a good child. You have
eased me of all the family cares: but do not now give more than ever
you relieved me from. You have been amply repaid in the reputation
your skill and management have given you: but now there is soon to be a
period to all those assistances from you. If you marry, there will be
a natural, and, if to please us, a desirable period; because your own
family will employ all your talents in that way: if you do not, there
will be a period likewise, but not a natural one--you understand me,
child.

I wept.

I have made inquiry already after a housekeeper. I would have had your
good Norton; but I suppose you will yourself wish to have the worthy
woman with you. If you desire it, that shall be agreed upon for you.

But, why, dearest Madam, why am I, the youngest, to be precipitated into
a state, that I am very far from wishing to enter into with any body?

You are going to question me, I suppose, why your sister is not thought
of for Mr. Solmes?

I hope, Madam, it will not displease you if I were.

I might refer you for an answer to your father.--Mr. Solmes has reasons
for preferring you--

And I have reasons, Madam, for disliking him. And why I am--

This quickness upon me, interrupted my mother, is not to be borne! I am
gone, and your father comes, if I can do no good with you.

O Madam, I would rather die, than--

She put her hand to my mouth--No peremptoriness, Clary Harlowe: once you
declare yourself inflexible, I have done.

I wept for vexation. This is all, all, my brother's doings--his grasping
views--

No reflections upon your brother: he has entirely the honour of the
family at heart.

I would no more dishonour my family, Madam, than my brother would.

I believe it: but I hope you will allow your father, and me, and your
uncles, to judge what will do it honour, what dishonour.

I then offered to live single; never to marry at all; or never but with
their full approbation.

If you mean to shew your duty, and your obedience, Clary, you must shew
it in our way, not in your own.

I hope, Madam, that I have not so behaved hitherto, as to render such a
trial of my obedience necessary.

Yes, Clary, I cannot but say that you have hitherto behaved extremely
well: but you have had no trials till now: and I hope, that now you are
called to one, you will not fail in it. Parents, proceeded she, when
children are young, are pleased with every thing they do. You have been
a good child upon the whole: but we have hitherto rather complied with
you, than you with us. Now that you are grown up to marriageable years,
is the test; especially as your grandfather has made you independent, as
we may say, in preference to those who had prior expectations upon that
estate.

Madam, my grandfather knew, and expressly mentioned in his will his
desire, that my father will more than make it up to my sister. I did
nothing but what I thought my duty to procure his favour. It was rather
a mark of his affection, than any advantage to me: For, do I either
seek or wish to be independent? Were I to be queen of the universe, that
dignity should not absolve me from my duty to you and to my father. I
would kneel for your blessings, were it in the presence of millions--so
that--

I am loth to interrupt you, Clary; though you could more than once break
in upon me. You are young and unbroken: but, with all this ostentation
of your duty, I desire you to shew a little more deference to me when I
am speaking.

I beg your pardon, dear Madam, and your patience with me on such an
occasion as this. If I did not speak with earnestness upon it, I should
be supposed to have only maidenly objections against a man I never can
endure.

Clary Harlowe--!

Dearest, dearest Madam, permit me to speak what I have to say, this
once--It is hard, it is very hard, to be forbidden to enter into
the cause of all these misunderstandings, because I must not speak
disrespectfully of one who supposes me in the way of his ambition, and
treats me like a slave--

Whither, whither, Clary--

My dearest Mamma!--My duty will not permit me so far to suppose my
father arbitrary, as to make a plea of that arbitrariness to you--

How now, Clary!--O girl!

Your patience, my dearest Mamma:--you were pleased to say, you would
hear me with patience.--PERSON in a man is nothing, because I am
supposed to be prudent: so my eye is to be disgusted, and my reason not
convinced--

Girl, girl!

Thus are my imputed good qualities to be made my punishment; and I am to
wedded to a monster--

[Astonishing!--Can this, Clarissa, be from you?

The man, Madam, person and mind, is a monster in my eye.]--And that
I may be induced to bear this treatment, I am to be complimented with
being indifferent to all men: yet, at other times, and to serve other
purposes, be thought prepossessed in favour of a man against whose moral
character lie just objections.--Confined, as if, like the giddiest of
creatures, I would run away with this man, and disgrace my whole family!
O my dearest Mamma! who can be patient under such treatment?

Now, Clary, I suppose you will allow me to speak. I think I have had
patience indeed with you.--Could I have thought--but I will put all upon
a short issue. Your mother, Clarissa, shall shew you an example of that
patience you so boldly claim from her, without having any yourself.

O my dear, how my mother's condescension distressed me at the
time!--Infinitely more distressed me, than rigour could have done. But
she knew, she was to be sure aware, that she was put upon a harsh, upon
an unreasonable service, let me say, or she would not, she could not,
have had so much patience with me.

Let me tell you then, proceeded she, that all lies in a small compass,
as your father said.--You have been hitherto, as you are pretty ready to
plead, a dutiful child. You have indeed had no cause to be otherwise. No
child was ever more favoured. Whether you will discredit all your past
behaviour; whether, at a time and upon an occasion, that the highest
instance of duty is expected from you (an instance that is to crown
all); and when you declare that your heart is free--you will give that
instance; or whether, having a view to the independence you may claim,
(for so, Clary, whatever be your motive, it will be judged,) and which
any man you favour, can assert for you against us all; or rather for
himself in spite of us--whether, I say, you will break with us all;
and stand in defiance of a jealous father, needlessly jealous, I will
venture to say, of the prerogatives of his sex, as to me, and still ten
times more jealous of the authority of a father;--this is now the point
with us. You know your father has made it a point; and did he ever give
up one he thought he had a right to carry?

Too true, thought I to myself! And now my brother has engaged my father,
his fine scheme will walk alone, without needing his leading-strings;
and it is become my father's will that I oppose; not my brother's
grasping views.

I was silent. To say the truth, I was just then sullenly silent. My
heart was too big. I thought it was hard to be thus given up by
my mother; and that she should make a will so uncontroulable as my
brother's, her will.--My mother, my dear, though I must not say so, was
not obliged to marry against her liking. My mother loved my father.

My silence availed me still less.

I see, my dear, said she, that you are convinced. Now, my good
child--now, my Clary, do I love you! It shall not be known, that you
have argued with me at all. All shall be imputed to that modesty which
has ever so much distinguished you. You shall have the full merit of
your resignation.

I wept.

She tenderly wiped the tears from my eyes, and kissed my cheek--Your
father expects you down with a cheerful countenance--but I will excuse
your going. All your scruples, you see, have met with an indulgence
truly maternal from me. I rejoice in the hope that you are convinced.
This indeed seems to be a proof of the truth of your agreeable
declaration, that your heart is free.

Did not this seem to border upon cruelty, my dear, in so indulgent a
mother?--It would be wicked [would it not] to suppose my mother capable
of art?--But she is put upon it, and obliged to take methods to which
her heart is naturally above stooping; and all intended for my good,
because she sees that no arguing will be admitted any where else!

I will go down, proceeded she, and excuse your attendance at afternoon
tea, as I did to dinner: for I know you will have some little
reluctances to subdue. I will allow you those; and also some little
natural shynesses--and so you shall not come down, if you chuse not to
come down. Only, my dear, do not disgrace my report when you come to
supper. And be sure behave as you used to do to your brother and sister;
for your behaviour to them will be one test of your cheerful obedience
to us. I advise as a friend, you see, rather than command as a
mother--So adieu, my love. And again she kissed me; and was going.

O my dear Mamma, said I, forgive me!--But surely you cannot believe, I
can ever think of having that man!

She was very angry, and seemed to be greatly disappointed. She
threatened to turn me over to my father and uncles:--she however bid
me (generously bid me) consider, what a handle I gave to my brother
and sister, if I thought they had views to serve by making my uncles
dissatisfied with me.

I, said she, in a milder accent, have early said all that I thought
could be said against the present proposal, on a supposition, that
you, who have refused several other (whom I own to be preferable as to
person) would not approve of it; and could I have succeeded, you,
Clary, had never heard of it. But if I could not, how can you expect
to prevail? My great ends in the task I have undertaken, are the
preservation of the family peace so likely to be overturned; to
reinstate you in the affections of your father and uncles: and to
preserve you from a man of violence.--Your father, you must needs think
will flame out upon your refusal to comply: your uncles are so

thoroughly convinced of the consistency of the measure with their
favourite views of aggrandizing the family, that they are as much
determined as your father: your aunt Hervey and your uncle Hervey are of
the same party. And it is hard, if a father and mother, and uncles, and
aunt, all conjoined, cannot be allowed to direct your choice--surely, my
dear girl, proceeded she [for I was silent all this time], it cannot be
that you are the more averse, because the family views will be promoted
by the match--this, I assure you, is what every body must think, if
you comply not. Nor, while the man, so obnoxious to us all, remains
unmarried, and buzzes about you, will the strongest wishes to live
single, be in the least regarded. And well you know, that were Mr.
Lovelace an angel, and your father had made it a point that you should
not have him, it would be in vain to dispute his will. As to the
prohibition laid upon you (much as I will own against my liking), that
is owing to the belief that you corresponded by Miss Howe's means with
that man; nor do I doubt that you did so.

I answered to every article, in such a manner, as I am sure would have
satisfied her, could she have been permitted to judge for herself; and I
then inveighed with bitterness against the disgraceful prohibitions laid
upon me.

They would serve to shew me, she was pleased to say, how much in earnest
my father was. They might be taken off, whenever I thought fit, and no
harm done, nor disgrace received. But if I were to be contumacious, I
might thank myself for all that would follow.

I sighed. I wept. I was silent.

Shall I, Clary, said she, shall I tell your father that these
prohibitions are as unnecessary as I hoped they would be? That you know
your duty, and will not offer to controvert his will? What say you, my
love?

O Madam, what can I say to questions so indulgently put? I do indeed
know my duty: no creature in the world is more willing to practise
it: but, pardon me, dearest Madam, if I say, that I must bear these
prohibitions, if I am to pay so dear to have them taken off.

Determined and perverse, my dear mamma called me: and after walking
twice or thrice in anger about the room, she turned to me: Your
heart free, Clarissa! How can you tell me your heart is free? Such
extraordinary prepossessions to a particular person must be owing to
extraordinary prepossessions in another's favour! Tell me, Clary, and
tell me truly--Do you not continue to correspond with Mr. Lovelace?

Dearest Madam, replied I, you know my motives: to prevent mischief, I
answered his letters. The reasons for our apprehensions of this sort are
not over.

I own to you, Clary, (although now I would not have it known,) that
I once thought a little qualifying among such violent spirits was not
amiss. I did not know but all things would come round again by the
mediation of Lord M. and his two sisters: but as they all three think
proper to resent for their nephew; and as their nephew thinks fit to
defy us all; and as terms are offered, on the other hand, that could
not be asked, which will very probably prevent your grandfather's estate
going out of the family, and may be a means to bring still greater into
it; I see not, that the continuance of your correspondence with him
either can or ought to be permitted. I therefore now forbid it to you,
as you value my favour.

Be pleased, Madam, only to advise me how to break it off with safety to
my brother and uncles; and it is all I wish for. Would to heaven, the
man so hated had not the pretence to make of having been too violently
treated, when he meant peace and reconciliation! It would always have
been in my own power to have broke with him. His reputed immoralities
would have given me a just pretence at any time to do so. But, Madam, as
my uncles and my brother will keep no measures; as he has heard what the
view is; and his regard for me from resenting their violent treatment
of him and his family; what can I do? Would you have me, Madam, make him
desperate?

The law will protect us, child! offended magistracy will assert itself--

But, Madam, may not some dreadful mischief first happen?--The law
asserts not itself, till it is offended.

You have made offers, Clary, if you might be obliged in the point in
question--Are you really in earnest, were you to be complied with, to
break off all correspondence with Mr. Lovelace?--Let me know this.

Indeed I am; and I will. You, Madam, shall see all the letters that
have passed between us. You shall see I have given him no encouragement
independent of my duty. And when you have seen them, you will be
better able to direct me how, on the condition I have offered, to break
entirely with him.

I take you at your word, Clarissa--Give me his letters; and the copies
of yours.

I am sure, Madam, you will keep the knowledge that I write, and what I
write--

No conditions with your mother--surely my prudence may be trusted to.

I begged her pardon; and besought her to take the key of the private
drawer in my escritoire, where they lay, that she herself might see that
I had no reserves to my mother.

She did; and took all his letters, and the copies of
mine.--Unconditioned with, she was pleased to say, they shall be yours
again, unseen by any body else.

I thanked her; and she withdrew to read them; saying, she would return
them, when she had.


***


You, my dear, have seen all the letters that passed between Mr. Lovelace
and me, till my last return from you. You have acknowledged, that he has
nothing to boast of from them. Three others I have received since, by
the private conveyance I told you of: the last I have not yet answered.

In these three, as in those you have seen, after having besought my
favour, and, in the most earnest manner, professed the ardour of his
passion for me; and set forth the indignities done him; the defiances
my brother throws out against him in all companies; the menaces, and
hostile appearance of my uncles wherever they go; and the methods they
take to defame him; he declares, 'That neither his own honour, nor
the honour of his family, (involved as that is in the undistinguishing
reflection cast upon him for an unhappy affair which he would have
shunned, but could not) permit him to bear these confirmed indignities:
that as my inclinations, if not favourable to him, cannot be, nor are,
to such a man as the newly-introduced Solmes, he is interested the more
to resent my brother's behaviour; who to every body avows his rancour
and malice; and glories in the probability he has, through the address
of this Solmes, of mortifying me, and avenging himself on him: that
it is impossible he should not think himself concerned to frustrate a
measure so directly levelled at him, had he not a still higher motive
for hoping to frustrate it: that I must forgive him, if he enter into
conference with Solmes upon it. He earnestly insists (upon what he has
so often proposed) that I will give him leave, in company with Lord
M. to wait upon my uncles, and even upon my father--and he promises
patience, if new provocations, absolutely beneath a man to bear, be not
given:' which by the way I am far from being able to engage for.

In my answer, I absolutely declare, as I tell him I have often done,
'That he is to expect no favour from me against the approbation of my
friends: that I am sure their consents for his visiting any of them
will never be obtained: that I will not be either so undutiful, or so
indiscreet, as to suffer my interests to be separated from the interests
of my family, for any man upon earth: that I do not think myself obliged
to him for the forbearance I desire one flaming spirit to have with
others: that in this desire I require nothing of him, but what prudence,
justice, and the laws of his country require: that if he has any
expectations of favour from me, on that account, he deceives himself:
that I have no inclination, as I have often told him, to change my
condition: that I cannot allow myself to correspond with him any longer
in this clandestine manner: it is mean, low, undutiful, I tell him; and
has a giddy appearance, which cannot be excused: that therefore he is
not to expect that I will continue it.

To this in his last, among other things, he replies, 'That if I am
actually determined to break off all correspondence with him, he must
conclude, that it is with a view to become the wife of a man, whom no
woman of honour and fortune can think tolerable. And in that case, I
must excuse him for saying, that he shall neither be able to bear the
thoughts of losing for ever a person in whom all his present and all his
future hopes are centred; nor support himself with patience under the
insolent triumphs of my brother upon it. But that nevertheless he will
not threaten either his own life, or that of any other man. He must take
his resolutions as such a dreaded event shall impel him at the time. If
he shall know that it will have my consent, he must endeavour to resign
to his destiny: but if it be brought about by compulsion, he shall not
be able to answer for the consequence.'

I will send you these letters for your perusal in a few days. I would
enclose them; but that it is possible something may happen, which may
make my mother require to re-peruse them. When you see them, you will
observe how he endeavours to hold me to this correspondence.


***


In about an hour my mother returned. Take your letters, Clary: I have
nothing, she was pleased to say, to tax your discretion with, as to the
wording of yours to him: you have even kept up a proper dignity, as
well as observed all the rules of decorum; and you have resented, as you
ought to resent, his menacing invectives. In a word, I see not, that he
can form the least expectations, from what you have written, that you
will encourage the passion he avows for you. But does he not avow his
passion? Have you the least doubt about what must be the issue of this
correspondence, if continued? And do you yourself think, when you know
the avowed hatred of one side, and he declared defiances of the other,
that this can be, that it ought to be a match?

By no means it can, Madam; you will be pleased to observed, that I have
said as much to him. But now, Madam, that the whole correspondence
is before you, I beg your commands what to do in a situation so very
disagreeable.

One thing I will tell you, Clary--but I charge you, as you would not
have me question the generosity of your spirit, to take no advantage
of it, either mentally or verbally; that I am so much pleased with the
offer of your keys to me, made in so cheerful and unreserved a manner,
and in the prudence you have shewn in your letters, that were it
practicable to bring every one, or your father only, into my opinion, I
should readily leave all the rest to your discretion, reserving only to
myself the direction or approbation of your future letters; and to see,
that you broke off the correspondence as soon as possible. But as it is
not, and as I know your father would have no patience with you, should
it be acknowledged that you correspond with Mr. Lovelace, or that you
have corresponded with him since the time he prohibited you to do so;
I forbid you to continue such a liberty--Yet, as the case is difficult,
let me ask you, What you yourself can propose? Your heart, you say, is
free. Your own, that you cannot think, as matters circumstanced, that
a match with a man so obnoxious as he now is to us all, is proper to
be thought of: What do you propose to do?--What, Clary, are your own
thoughts of the matter?

Without hesitation thus I answered--What I humbly propose is
this:--'That I will write to Mr. Lovelace (for I have not answered his
last) that he has nothing to do between my father and me: that I
neither ask his advice nor need it: but that since he thinks he has some
pretence for interfering, because of my brother's avowal of the interest
of Mr. Solmes in displeasure to him, I will assure him (without giving
him any reason to impute the assurance to be in the least favourable to
himself) that I will never be that man's.' And if, proceeded I, I
may never be permitted to give him this assurance; and Mr. Solmes, in
consequence of it, be discouraged from prosecuting his address; let Mr.
Lovelace be satisfied or dissatisfied, I will go no farther; nor write
another line to him; nor ever see him more, if I can avoid it: and I
shall have a good excuse for it, without bringing in any of my family.

Ah! my love!--But what shall we do about the terms Mr. Solmes offers?
Those are the inducements with every body. He has even given hopes to
your brother that he will make exchanges of estates; or, at least, that
he will purchase the northern one; for you know it must be entirely
consistent with the family-views, that we increase our interest in this
country. Your brother, in short, has given a plan that captivates us
all. And a family so rich in all its branches, and that has its views to
honour, must be pleased to see a very great probability of taking rank
one day among the principal in the kingdom.

And for the sake of these views, for the sake of this plan of my
brother's, am I, Madam, to be given in marriage to a man I can never
endure!--O my dear Mamma, save me, save me, if you can, from this heavy
evil.--I had rather be buried alive, indeed I had, than have that man!

She chid me for my vehemence; but was so good as to tell me, That she
would sound my uncle Harlowe, who was then below; and if he encouraged
her (or would engage to second her) she would venture to talk to my
father herself; and I should hear further in the morning.

She went down to tea, and kindly undertook to excuse my attendance at
supper.

But is it not a sad thing, I repeat, to be obliged to stand in
opposition to the will of such a mother? Why, as I often say to myself,
was such a man as this Solmes fixed upon? The only man in the world,
surely, that could offer so much, and deserve so little!

Little indeed does he deserve!--Why, my dear, the man has the most
indifferent of characters. Every mouth is opened against him for his
sordid ways--A foolish man, to be so base-minded!--When the difference
between the obtaining of a fame for generosity, and incurring the
censure of being a miser, will not, prudently managed, cost fifty pounds
a year.

What a name have you got, at a less expense? And what an opportunity had
he of obtaining credit at a very small one, succeeding such a wretched
creature as Sir Oliver, in fortunes so vast?--Yet has he so behaved,
that the common phrase is applied to him, That Sir Oliver will never be
dead while Mr. Solmes lives.

The world, as I have often thought, ill-natured as it is said to be, is
generally more just in characters (speaking by what it feels) than is
usually apprehended: and those who complain most of its censoriousness,
perhaps should look inwardly for the occasion oftener than they do.

My heart is a little at ease, on the hopes that my mother will be able
to procure favour for me, and a deliverance from this man; and so I
have leisure to moralize. But if I had not, I should not forbear to
intermingle occasionally these sorts of remarks, because you command
me never to omit them when they occur to my mind: and not to be able
to make them, even in a more affecting situation, when one sits down
to write, would shew one's self more engaged to self, and to one's own
concerns, than attentive to the wishes of a friend. If it be said, that
it is natural so to be, what makes that nature, on occasions where a
friend may be obliged, or reminded of a piece of instruction, which
(writing down) one's self may be the better for, but a fault; which it
would set a person above nature to subdue?




LETTER XVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. MAR. 4.


Would you not have thought something might have been obtained in my
favour, from an offer so reasonable, from an expedient so proper, as I
imagine, to put a tolerable end, as from myself, to a correspondence I
hardly know how otherwise, with safety to some of my family, to get rid
of?--But my brother's plan, (which my mother spoke of, and of which I
have in vain endeavoured to procure a copy, with a design to take it to
pieces, and expose it, as I question not there is room to do,) joined
with my father's impatience of contradiction, are irresistible.

I have not been in bed all night; nor am I in the least drowsy.
Expectation, and hope, and doubt, (an uneasy state!) kept me
sufficiently wakeful. I stept down at my usual time, that it might not
be known I had not been in bed; and gave directions in the family way.

About eight o'clock, Shorey came to me from my mother with orders to
attend her in her chamber.

My mother had been weeping, I saw by her eyes: but her aspect seemed to
be less tender, and less affectionate, than the day before; and this, as
soon as I entered into her presence, struck me with an awe, which gave a
great damp to my spirits.

Sit down, Clary Harlowe; I shall talk to you by-and-by: and continued
looking into a drawer among laces and linens, in a way neither busy nor
unbusy.

I believe it was a quarter of an hour before she spoke to me (my heart
throbbing with the suspense all the time); and then she asked me coldly,
What directions I had given for the day?

I shewed her the bill of fare for this day, and to-morrow, if, I said,
it pleased her to approve of it.

She made a small alteration in it; but with an air so cold and so
solemn, as added to my emotions.

Mr. Harlowe talks of dining out to-day, I think, at my brother
Antony's--

Mr. Harlowe!--Not my father!--Have I not then a father!--thought I.

Sit down when I bid you.

I sat down.

You look very sullen, Clary.

I hope not, Madam.

If children would always be children--parents--And there she stopt.

She then went to her toilette, and looked into the glass, and gave half
a sigh--the other half, as if she would not have sighed if she could
have helped it, she gently hem'd away.

I don't love to see the girl look so sullen.

Indeed, Madam, I am not sullen.--And I arose, and, turning from her,
drew out my handkerchief; for the tears ran down my cheeks.

I thought, by the glass before me, I saw the mother in her softened eye
cast towards me. But her words confirmed not the hoped-for tenderness.

One of the most provoking things in this world is, to have people cry
for what they can help!

I wish to heaven I could, Madam!--And I sobbed again.

Tears of penitence and sobs of perverseness are mighty well suited!--You
may go up to your chamber. I shall talk with you by-and-by.

I courtesied with reverence.

Mock me not with outward gestures of respect. The heart, Clary, is what
I want.

Indeed, Madam, you have it. It is not so much mine as my Mamma's!

Fine talking!--As somebody says, If words were to pass for duty,
Clarissa Harlowe would be the dutifulest child breathing.

God bless that somebody!--Be it whom it will, God bless that
somebody!--And I courtesied, and, pursuant to her last command, was
going.

She seemed struck; but was to be angry with me.

So turning from me, she spoke with quickness, Whither now, Clary
Harlowe?

You commanded me, Madam, to go to my chamber.

I see you are very ready to go out of my presence.--Is your compliance
the effect of sullenness, or obedience?--You are very ready to leave me.

I could hold no longer; but threw myself at her feet: O my dearest
Mamma! Let me know all I am to suffer! Let me know what I am to be!--I
will bear it, if I can bear it: but your displeasure I cannot bear!

Leave me, leave me, Clary Harlowe!--No kneeling!--Limbs so supple! Will
so stubborn!--Rise, I tell you.

I cannot rise! I will disobey my Mamma, when she bids me leave her
without being reconciled to me! No sullens, my Mamma: no perverseness:
but, worse than either: this is direct disobedience!--Yet tear not
yourself from me! [wrapping my arms about her as I kneeled; she
struggling to get from me; my face lifted up to hers, with eyes
running over, that spoke not my heart if they were not all humility and
reverence] You must not, must not, tear yourself from me! [for still
the dear lady struggled, and looked this way and that, all in a sweet
disorder, as if she knew not what to do].--I will neither rise, nor
leave you, nor let you go, till you say you are not angry with me.

O thou ever-moving child of my heart! [folding her dear arms about my
neck, as mine embraced her knees] Why was this task--But leave me!--You
have discomposed me beyond expression! Leave me, my dear!--I won't be
angry with you--if I can help it--if you'll be good.

I arose trembling, and, hardly knowing what I did, or how I stood or
walked, withdrew to my chamber. My Hannah followed me as soon as she
heard me quit my mother's presence, and with salts and spring-water just
kept me from fainting; and that was as much as she could do. It was near
two hours before I could so far recover myself as to take up my pen, to
write to you how unhappily my hopes have ended.

My mother went down to breakfast. I was not fit to appear: but if I
had been better, I suppose I should not have been sent for; since the
permission for my attending her down, was given by my father (when in
my chamber) only on condition that she found me worthy of the name of
daughter. That, I doubt, I shall never be in his opinion, if he be not
brought to change his mind as to this Mr. Solmes.




LETTER XIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [IN ANSWER TO LETTER XV.] SAT. MARCH
4, 12 O'CLOCK.


Hannah has just now brought me from the usual place your favour of
yesterday. The contents of it have made me very thoughtful; and you
will have an answer in my gravest style.--I to have that Mr. Solmes!--No
indeed!--I will sooner--But I will write first to those passages in your
letter which are less concerning, that I may touch upon this part with
more patience.

As to what you mention of my sister's value for Mr. Lovelace, I am not
very much surprised at it. She takes such officious pains, and it is so
much her subject, to have it thought that she never did, and never could
like him, that she gives but too much room to suspect that she does. She
never tells the story of their parting, and of her refusal of him, but
her colour rises, she looks with disdain upon me, and mingles anger with
the airs she gives herself:--anger as well as airs, demonstrating, that
she refused a man whom she thought worth accepting: Where else is the
reason either for anger or boast?--Poor Bella! She is to be pitied--she
cannot either like or dislike with temper! Would to heaven she had been
mistress of all her wishes!--Would to heaven she had!

As to what you say of my giving up to my father's controul the estate
devised me, my motives at the time, as you acknowledge, were not
blamable. Your advice to me on the subject was grounded, as I remember,
on your good opinion of me; believing that I should not make a bad use
of the power willed me. Neither you nor I, my dear, although you now
assume the air of a diviner, [pardon me] could have believed that would
have happened which has happened, as to my father's part particularly.
You were indeed jealous of my brother's views against me; or rather of
his predominant love of himself; but I did not think so hardly of my
brother and sister as you always did. You never loved them; and ill-will
has eyes ever open to the faulty side; as good-will or love is blind
even to real imperfections. I will briefly recollect my motives.

I found jealousies and uneasiness rising in every breast, where all
before was unity and love. The honoured testator was reflected upon: a
second childhood was attributed to him; and I was censured, as having
taken advantage of it. All young creatures, thought I, more or less,
covet independency; but those who wish most for it, are seldom the
fittest to be trusted either with the government of themselves, or with
power over others. This is certainly a very high and unusual devise to
so young a creature. We should not aim at all we have power to do. To
take all that good-nature, or indulgence, or good opinion confers,
shews a want of moderation, and a graspingness that is unworthy of that
indulgence; and are bad indications of the use that may be made of the
power bequeathed. It is true, thought I, that I have formed agreeable
schemes of making others as happy as myself, by the proper discharge of
the stewardship intrusted to me. [Are not all estates stewardships,
my dear?] But let me examine myself: Is not vanity, or secret love
of praise, a principal motive with me at the bottom?--Ought I not to
suspect my own heart? If I set up for myself, puffed up with every one's
good opinion, may I not be left to myself?--Every one's eyes are upon
the conduct, upon the visits, upon the visiters, of a young creature
of our sex, made independent: And are not such subjected, more than any
others, to the attempts of enterprisers and fortune-seekers?--And then,
left to myself, should I take a wrong step, though with ever so good an
intention, how many should I have to triumph over me, how few to pity
me!--The more of the one, and the fewer of the other, for having aimed
at excelling.

These were some of my reflections at the time: and I have no doubt, but
that in the same situation I should do the very same thing; and that
upon the maturest deliberation. Who can command or foresee events? To
act up to our best judgments at the time, is all we can do. If I have
erred, 'tis to worldly wisdom only that I have erred. If we suffer by an
act of duty, or even by an act of generosity, is it not pleasurable on
reflection, that the fault is in others, rather than in ourselves?--I
had much rather have reason to think others unkind, than that they
should have any to think me undutiful.

And so, my dear, I am sure had you.

And now for the most concerning part of your letter.

You think I must of necessity, as matters are circumstanced, be Solmes's
wife. I will not be very rash, my dear, in protesting to the contrary:
but I think it never can, and, what is still more, never ought to
be!--My temper, I know, is depended upon. But I have heretofore said,*
that I have something in me of my father's family, as well as of my
mother's. And have I any encouragement to follow too implicitly the
example which my mother sets of meekness, and resignedness to the wills
of others? Is she not for ever obliged (as she was pleased to hint to
me) to be of the forbearing side? In my mother's case, your observation
I must own is verified, that those who will bear much, shall have much
to bear.** What is it, as she says, that she has not sacrificed to
peace?--Yet, has she by her sacrifices always found the peace she has
deserved to find? Indeed, no!--I am afraid the very contrary. And often
and often have I had reason (on her account) to reflect, that we poor
mortals, by our over-solicitude to preserve undisturbed the qualities we
are constitutionally fond of, frequently lose the benefits we propose
to ourselves from them: since the designing and encroaching (finding out
what we most fear to forfeit) direct their batteries against these our
weaker places, and, making an artillery (if I may so phrase it) of our
hopes and fears, play upon us at their pleasure.


     * See Letter IX.

     ** See Letter X.


Steadiness of mind, (a quality which the ill-bred and censorious deny to
any of our sex) when we are absolutely convinced of being in the right
[otherwise it is not steadiness, but obstinacy] and when it is exerted
in material cases, is a quality, which, as my good Dr. Lewen was wont to
say, brings great credit to the possessor of it; at the same time that
it usually, when tried and known, raises such above the attempts of
the meanly machinating. He used therefore to inculcate upon me this
steadiness, upon laudable convictions. And why may I not think that I am
now put upon a proper exercise of it?

I said above, that I never can be, that I never ought to be, Mrs.
Solmes.--I repeat, that I ought not: for surely, my dear, I should not
give up to my brother's ambition the happiness of my future life. Surely
I ought not to be the instrument of depriving Mr. Solmes's relations of
their natural rights and reversionary prospects, for the sake of further
aggrandizing a family (although that I am of) which already lives
in great affluence and splendour; and which might be as justly
dissatisfied, were all that some of it aim at to be obtained, that they
were not princes, as now they are that they are not peers [For when ever
was an ambitious mind, as you observe in the case of avarice,* satisfied
by acquisition?]. The less, surely, ought I to give into these grasping
views of my brother, as I myself heartily despise the end aimed at; as
I wish not either to change my state, or better my fortunes; and as I
am fully persuaded, that happiness and riches are two things, and very
seldom meet together.


     * See Letter X.


Yet I dread, I exceedingly dread, the conflicts I know I must
encounter with. It is possible, that I may be more unhappy from the due
observation of the good doctor's general precept, than were I to
yield the point; since what I call steadiness is deemed stubbornness,
obstinacy, prepossession, by those who have a right to put what
interpretation they please upon my conduct.

So, my dear, were we perfect (which no one can be) we could not be
happy in this life, unless those with whom we have to deal (those more
especially who have any controul upon us) were governed by the same
principles. But then does not the good Doctor's conclusion recur,--That
we have nothing to do, but to chuse what is right; to be steady in the
pursuit of it; and to leave the issue to Providence?

This, if you approve of my motives, (and if you don't, pray inform me)
must be my aim in the present case.

But what then can I plead for a palliation to myself of my mother's
sufferings on my account? Perhaps this consideration will carry some
force with it--That her difficulties cannot last long; only till
this great struggle shall be one way or other determined--Whereas my
unhappiness, if I comply, will (from an aversion not to be overcome) be
for life. To which let me add, That as I have reason to think that the
present measures are not entered upon with her own natural liking, she
will have the less pain, should they want the success which I think in
my heart they ought to want.

I have run a great length in a very little time. The subject touched me
to the quick. My reflections upon it will give you reason to expect from
me a perhaps too steady behaviour in a new conference, which, I find, I
must have with my mother. My father and brother, as she was pleased
to tell me, dine at my uncle Antony's; and that, as I have reason to
believe, on purpose to give an opportunity for it.

Hannah informs me, that she heard my father high and angry with my
mother, at taking leave of her: I suppose for being to favourable to me;
for Hannah heard her say, as in tears, 'Indeed, Mr. Harlowe, you greatly
distress me!--The poor girl does not deserve--' Hannah heard no more,
but that he said, he would break somebody's heart--Mine, I suppose--Not
my mother's, I hope.

As only my sister dines with my mother, I thought I should have been
commanded down: but she sent me up a plate from her table. I continued
my writing. I could not touch a morsel. I ordered Hannah however to eat
of it, that I might not be thought sullen.

Before I conclude this, I will see whether any thing offers from either
of my private correspondencies, that will make it proper to add to it;
and will take a turn in the wood-yard and garden for that purpose.


***


I am stopped. Hannah shall deposit this. She was ordered by my mother
(who asked where I was) to tell me, that she would come up and talk with
me in my own closet.--She is coming! Adieu, my dear.




LETTER XX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. AFTERNOON.


The expected conference is over: but my difficulties are increased.
This, as my mother was pleased to tell me, being the last persuasory
effort that is to be attempted, I will be particular in the account of
it as my head and my heart will allow it to be.

I have made, said she, as she entered my room, a short as well as early
dinner, on purpose to confer with you: and I do assure you, that it will
be the last conference I shall either be permitted or inclined to hold
with you on the subject, if you should prove as refractory as it is
imagined you will prove by some, who are of opinion, that I have not
the weight with you which my indulgence deserves. But I hope you will
convince as well them as me of the contrary.

Your father both dines and sups at your uncle's, on purpose to give
us this opportunity; and, according to the report I shall make on his
return, (which I have promised shall be a very faithful one,) he will
take his measures with you.

I was offering to speak--Hear, Clarissa, what I have to tell you, said
she, before you speak, unless what you have to say will signify to me
your compliance--Say--Will it?--If it will, you may speak.

I was silent.

She looked with concern and anger upon me--No compliance, I find!--Such
a dutiful young creature hitherto!--Will you not, can you not, speak as
I would have you speak?--Then [rejecting me as it were with her hand]
continue silent.--I, no more than your father, will bear your avowed
contradiction.

She paused, with a look of expectation, as if she waited for my
consenting answer.

I was still silent; looking down; the tears in my eyes.

O thou determined girl!--But say--Speak out--Are you resolved to stand
in opposition to us all, in a point our hearts are set upon?

May I, Madam, be permitted to expostulate?--

To what purpose expostulate with me, Clarissa? Your father is
determined. Have I not told you there is no receding; that the honour as
well as the interest of the family is concerned? Be ingenuous: you used
to be so, even occasionally against yourself:--Who at the long run must
submit--all of us to you; or you to all of us?--If you intend to yield
at last if you find you cannot conquer, yield now, and with a grace--for
yield you must, or be none of our child.

I wept. I knew not what to say; or rather how to express what I had to
say.

Take notice, that there are flaws in your grandfather's will: not
a shilling of that estate will be yours, if you do not yield. Your
grandfather left it to you, as a reward of your duty to him and to
us--You will justly forfeit it, if--

Permit me, good Madam, to say, that, if it were unjustly bequeathed me,
I ought not to wish to have it. But I hope Mr. Solmes will be apprised
of these flaws.

This is very pertly said, Clarissa: but reflect, that the forfeiture of
that estate, through your opposition, will be attended with the total
loss of your father's favour: and then how destitute must you be; how
unable to support yourself; and how many benevolent designs and good
actions must you give up!

I must accommodate myself, Madam, in the latter case, to my
circumstance: much only is required where much is given. It becomes me
to be thankful for what I have had. I have reason to bless you, Madam,
and my good Mrs. Norton, for bringing me up to be satisfied with little;
with much less, I will venture to say, than my father's indulgence
annually confers upon me.--And then I thought of the old Roman and his
lentils.

What perverseness! said my mother.--But if you depend upon the favour of
either or both of your uncles, vain will be that dependence: they
will give you up, I do assure you, if your father does, and absolutely
renounce you.

I am sorry, Madam, that I have had so little merit as to have made no
deeper impressions of favour for me in their hearts: but I will love and
honour them as long as I live.

All this, Clarissa, makes your prepossession in a certain man's favour
the more evident. Indeed, your brother and sister cannot go any where,
but they hear of these prepossessions.

It is a great grief to me, Madam, to be made the subject of the public
talk: but I hope you will have the goodness to excuse me for observing,
that the authors of my disgrace within doors, the talkers of my
prepossession without, and the reporters of it from abroad, are
originally the same persons.

She severely chid me for this.

I received her rebukes in silence.

You are sullen, Clarissa: I see you are sullen.--And she walked about
the room in anger. Then turning to me--You can bear the imputation of
sullenness I see!--You have no concern to clear yourself of it. I was
afraid of telling you all I was enjoined to tell you, in case you were
to be unpersuadable: but I find that I had a greater opinion of
your delicacy, of your gentleness, than I needed to have--it cannot
discompose so steady, so inflexible a young creature, to be told, as I
now tell you, that the settlements are actually drawn; and that you will
be called down in a very few days to hear them read, and to sign them:
for it is impossible, if your heart be free, that you can make the least
objection to them; except it will be an objection with you, that they
are so much in your favour, and in the favour of all our family.

I was speechless, absolutely speechless. Although my heart was ready to
burst, yet could I neither weep nor speak.

I am sorry, said she, for your averseness to this match: [match she was
pleased to call it!] but there is no help. The honour and interest
of the family, as your aunt has told you, and as I have told you, are
concerned; and you must comply.

I was still speechless.

She folded the warm statue, as she was pleased to call me, in her arms;
and entreated me, for heaven's sake, to comply.

Speech and tears were lent me at the same time.--You have given me life,
Madam, said I, clasping my uplifted hands together, and falling on one
knee; a happy one, till now, has your goodness, and my papa's, made it!
O do not, do not, make all the remainder of it miserable!

Your father, replied she, is resolved not to see you, till he sees you
as obedient a child as you used to be. You have never been put to a test
till now, that deserved to be called a test. This is, this must be,
my last effort with you. Give me hope, my dear child: my peace is
concerned: I will compound with you but for hope: and yet your
father will not be satisfied without an implicit, and even a cheerful
obedience--Give me but hope, child!

To give you hope, my dearest, my most indulgent Mamma, is to give you
every thing. Can I be honest, if I give a hope that I cannot confirm?

She was very angry. She again called me perverse: she upbraided me with
regarding only my own prepossessions, and respecting not either her
peace of mind or my own duty:--'It is a grating thing, said she, for the
parents of a child, who delighted in her in all the time of her helpless
infancy, and throughout every stage of her childhood; and in every
part of her education to womanhood, because of the promises she gave of
proving the most grateful and dutiful of children; to find, just when
the time arrived which should crown their wishes, that child stand in
the way of her own happiness, and her parents' comfort,and, refusing an
excellent offer and noble settlements, give suspicions to her anxious
friends, that she would become the property of a vile rake and
libertine, who (be the occasion what it will) defies her family, and has
actually embrued his hands in her brother's blood.

'I have had a very hard time of it, said she, between your father and
you; for, seeing your dislike, I have more than once pleaded for you:
but all to no purpose. I am only treated as a too fond mother, who,
from motives of a blamable indulgence, encourage a child to stand in
opposition to a father's will. I am charged with dividing the family
into two parts; I and my youngest daughter standing against my husband,
his two brothers, my son, my eldest daughter, and my sister Hervey.
I have been told, that I must be convinced of the fitness as well
as advantage to the whole (your brother and Mr. Lovelace out of the
question) of carrying the contract with Mr. Solmes, on which so many
contracts depend, into execution.

'Your father's heart, I tell you once more, is in it: he has declared,
that he had rather have no daughter in you, than one he cannot dispose
of for your own good: especially if you have owned, that your heart is
free; and as the general good of his whole family is to be promoted
by your obedience. He has pleaded, poor man! that his frequent gouty
paroxysms (every fit more threatening than the former) give him no
extraordinary prospects, either of worldly happiness, or of long days:
and he hopes, that you, who have been supposed to have contributed
to the lengthening of your grandfather's life, will not, by your
disobedience, shorten your father's.'

This was a most affecting plea, my dear. I wept in silence upon it. I
could not speak to it. And my mother proceeded: 'What therefore can be
his motives, Clary Harlowe, in the earnest desire he has to see this
treaty perfected, but the welfare and aggrandizement of his family;
which already having fortunes to become the highest condition, cannot
but aspire to greater distinctions? However slight such views as these
may appear to you, Clary, you know, that they are not slight ones to any
other of the family: and your father will be his own judge of what
is and what is not likely to promote the good of his children. Your
abstractedness, child, (affectation of abstractedness, some call it,)
savours, let me tell you, of greater particularity, than we aim to
carry. Modesty and humility, therefore, will oblige you rather to
mistrust yourself of peculiarity, than censure views which all the world
pursues, as opportunity offers.'

I was still silent; and she proceeded--'It is owing to the good opinion,
Clary, which your father has of you, and of your prudence, duty, and
gratitude, that he engaged for your compliance, in your absence (before
you returned from Miss Howe); and that he built and finished contracts
upon it, which cannot be made void, or cancelled.'

But why then, thought I, did they receive me, on my return from Miss
Howe, with so much intimidating solemnity?--To be sure, my dear, this
argument, as well as the rest, was obtruded upon my mother.

She went on, 'Your father has declared, that your unexpected opposition,
[unexpected she was pleased to call it,] and Mr. Lovelace's continued
menaces and insults, more and more convince him, that a short day is
necessary in order to put an end to all that man's hopes, and to his own
apprehensions resulting from the disobedience of a child so favoured. He
has therefore actually ordered patterns of the richest silks to be sent
for from London--'

I started--I was out of breath--I gasped, at this frightful
precipitance--I was going to open with warmth against it. I knew whose
the happy expedient must be: female minds, I once heard my brother say,
that could but be brought to balance on the change of their state,
might easily be determined by the glare and splendour of the nuptial
preparations, and the pride of becoming the mistress of a family.--But
she was pleased to hurry on, that I might not have time to express
my disgusts at such a communication--to this effect: 'Your father
therefore, my Clary, cannot, either for your sake, or his own, labour
under a suspense so affecting to his repose. He has even thought fit to
acquaint me, on my pleading for you, that it becomes me, as I value my
own peace, [how harsh to such a wife!] and as I wish, that he does not
suspect that I secretly favour the address of a vile rake, (a character
which all the sex, he is pleased to say, virtuous and vicious, are but
too fond of!) to exert my authority over you: and that this I may the
less scrupulously do, as you have owned [the old string!] that your
heart is free.'

Unworthy reflection in my mother's case, surely, this of our sex's
valuing a libertine; since she made choice of my father in preference
to several suitors of equal fortune, because they were of inferior
reputation for morals!

'Your father, added she, at his going out, told me what he expected
from me, in case I found out that I had not the requisite influence upon
you--It was this--That I should directly separate myself from you, and
leave you singly to take the consequence of your double disobedience--I
therefore entreat you, my dear Clarissa, concluded she, and that in the
most earnest and condescending manner, to signify to your father, on his
return, your ready obedience; and this as well for my sake as your own.'

Affected by my mother's goodness to me, and by that part of her argument
which related to her own peace, and to the suspicions they had of her
secretly inclining to prefer the man so hated by them, to the man so
much my aversion, I could not but wish it were possible for me to obey,
I therefore paused, hesitated, considered, and was silent for some time.
I could see, that my mother hoped that the result of this hesitation
would be favourable to her arguments. But then recollecting, that all
was owing to the instigations of a brother and sister, wholly actuated
by selfish and envious views; that I had not deserved the treatment I
had of late met with; that my disgrace was already become the public
talk; that the man was Mr. Solmes; and that my aversion to him was too
generally known, to make my compliance either creditable to myself or
to them: that it would give my brother and sister a triumph over me,
and over Mr. Lovelace, which they would not fail to glory in; and which,
although it concerned me but little to regard on his account, yet might
be attended with fatal mischiefs--And then Mr. Solmes's
disagreeable person; his still more disagreeable manners; his low
understanding--Understanding! the glory of a man, so little to be
dispensed with in the head and director of a family, in order to
preserve to him that respect which a good wife (and that for the
justification of her own choice) should pay him herself, and wish every
body to pay him.--And as Mr. Solmes's inferiority in this respectable
faculty of the human mind [I must be allowed to say this to you, and no
great self assumption neither] would proclaim to all future, as well as
to all present observers, what must have been my mean inducement. All
these reflections crowding upon my remembrance; I would, Madam, said
I, folding my hands, with an earnestness in which my whole heart was
engaged, bear the cruelest tortures, bear loss of limb, and even of
life, to give you peace. But this man, every moment I would, at you
command, think of him with favour, is the more my aversion. You cannot,
indeed you cannot, think, how my whole soul resists him!--And to talk
of contracts concluded upon; of patterns; of a short day!--Save me,
save me, O my dearest Mamma, save your child, from this heavy, from this
insupportable evil--!

Never was there a countenance that expressed so significantly, as my
mother's did, an anguish, which she struggled to hide, under an anger
she was compelled to assume--till the latter overcoming the former, she
turned from me with an uplifted eye, and stamping--Strange perverseness!
were the only words I heard of a sentence that she angrily pronounced;
and was going. I then, half-frantically I believe, laid hold of her
gown--Have patience with me, dearest Madam! said I--Do not you renounce
me totally!--If you must separate yourself from your child, let it
not be with absolute reprobation on your own part!--My uncles may be
hard-hearted--my father may be immovable--I may suffer from my brother's
ambition, and from my sister's envy!--But let me not lose my Mamma's
love; at least, her pity.

She turned to me with benigner rays--You have my love! You have my pity!
But, O my dearest girl--I have not yours.

Indeed, indeed, Madam, you have: and all my reverence, all my gratitude,
you have!--But in this one point--Cannot I be this once obliged?--Will
no expedient be accepted? Have I not made a very fair proposal as to Mr.
Lovelace?

I wish, for both our sakes, my dear unpersuadable girl, that the
decision of this point lay with me. But why, when you know it does not,
why should you thus perplex and urge me?--To renounce Mr. Lovelace is
now but half what is aimed at. Nor will any body else believe you in
earnest in the offer, if I would. While you remain single, Mr. Lovelace
will have hopes--and you, in the opinion of others, inclinations.

Permit me, dearest Madam, to say, that your goodness to me, your
patience, your peace, weigh more with me, than all the rest put
together: for although I am to be treated by my brother, and, through
his instigations, by my father, as a slave in this point, and not as a
daughter, yet my mind is not that of a slave. You have not brought me up
to be mean.

So, Clary! you are already at defiance with your father! I have had too
much cause before to apprehend as much--What will this come to?--I, and
then my dear mamma sighed--I, am forced to put up with many humours--

That you are, my ever-honoured Mamma, is my grief. And can it be
thought, that this very consideration, and the apprehension of what may
result from a much worse-tempered man, (a man who has not half the sense
of my father,) has not made an impression upon me, to the disadvantage
of the married life? Yet 'tis something of an alleviation, if one must
bear undue controul, to bear it from a man of sense. My father, I
have heard you say, Madam, was for years a very good-humoured
gentleman--unobjectionable in person and manners--but the man proposed
to me--

Forbear reflecting upon your father: [Did I, my dear, in what I have
repeated, and I think they are the very words, reflect upon my father?]
it is not possible, I must say again, and again, were all men equally
indifferent to you, that you should be thus sturdy in your will. I am
tired out with your obstinacy--The most unpersuadable girl--You forget,
that I must separate myself from you, if you will not comply. You do not
remember that you father will take you up, where I leave you. Once
more, however, I will put it to you,--Are you determined to brave your
father's displeasure?--Are you determined to defy your uncles?--Do you
choose to break with us all, rather than encourage Mr. Solmes?--Rather
than give me hope?

Dreadful alternative--But is not my sincerity, is not the integrity of
my heart, concerned in the answer? May not my everlasting happiness
be the sacrifice? Will not the least shadow of the hope you just now
demanded from me, be driven into absolute and sudden certainty? Is it
not sought to ensnare, to entangle me in my own desire of obeying, if
I could give answers that might be construed into hope?--Forgive
me, Madam: bear with your child's boldness in such a cause as
this!--Settlements drawn!--Patterns sent for!--An early day!--Dear, dear
Madam, how can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's?

Ah, girl, never say your heart is free! You deceive yourself if you
think it is.

Thus to be driven [and I wrung my hands through impatience] by the
instigations of a designing, an ambitious brother, and by a sister,
that--

How often, Clary, must I forbid your unsisterly reflections?--Does not
your father, do not your uncles, does not every body, patronize
Mr. Solmes? And let me tell you, ungrateful girl, and unmovable as
ungrateful, let me repeatedly tell you, that it is evident to me, that
nothing but a love unworthy of your prudence can make you a creature
late so dutiful, now so sturdy. You may guess what your father's first
question on his return will be. He must know, that I can do nothing with
you. I have done my part. Seek me, if your mind change before he comes
back: you have yet a little more time, as he stays supper. I will no
more seek you, nor to you.--And away she flung.

What could I do but weep?

I am extremely affected on my mother's account--more, I must needs say,
than on my own. And indeed, all things considered, and especially, that
the measure she is engaged in, is (as I dare say it is) against her own
judgment, she deserves more compassion than myself.--Excellent woman!
What pity, that meekness and condescension should not be attended with
the due rewards of those charming graces!--Yet had she not let violent
spirits (as I have elsewhere observed with no small regret) find their
power over hers, it could not have been thus.

But here, run away with my pen, I suffer my mother to be angry with me
on her own account. She hinted to me, indeed, that I must seek her, if
my mind changed; which is a condition that amounts to a prohibition of
attending her: but, as she left me in displeasure, will it not have a
very obstinate appearance, and look like a kind of renunciation of her
mediation in my favour, if I go not down before my father returns, to
supplicate her pity, and her kind report to him?

I will attend her. I had rather all the world should be angry with me
than my mamma!

Mean time, to clear my hands from papers of such a nature, Hannah shall
deposit this. If two or three letters reach you together, they will but
express from one period to another, the anxieties and difficulties which
the mind of your unhappy but ever affectionate friend labours under.

CL. H.




LETTER XXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. NIGHT.


I have been down. I am to be unlucky in all I do, I think, be my
intentions ever so good. I have made matters worse instead of better: as
I shall now tell you.

I found my mother and sister together in my sister's parlour. My mother,
I fear, by the glow of her fine face, (and as the browner, sullener glow
in her sister's confirmed,) had been expressing herself with warmth,
against her unhappier child: perhaps giving such an account of what had
passed, as should clear herself, and convince Bella, and, through her,
my brother and uncles, of the sincere pains she had taken with me.

I entered like a dejected criminal; and besought the favour of a private
audience. My mother's return, both looks and words, gave but too much
reason for my above surmise.

You have, said she [looking at me with a sternness that never sits well
on her sweet features] rather a requesting than a conceding countenance,
Clarissa Harlowe: if I am mistaken, tell me so; and I will withdraw with
you wherever you will.--Yet whether so, or not, you may say what you
have to say before your sister.

My mother, I thought, might have withdrawn with me, as she knows that I
have not a friend in my sister.

I come down, Madam, said I, to beg of you to forgive me for any thing
you may have taken amiss in what passed above respecting your honoured
self; and that you will be pleased to use your endeavours to soften my
papa's displeasure against me, on his return.

Such aggravating looks; such lifting up of hands and eyes; such a
furrowed forehead, in my sister!

My mother was angry enough without all that; and asked me to what
purpose I came down, if I were still so intractable.

She had hardly spoken the words, when Shorey came in to tell her, that
Mr. Solmes was in the hall, and desired admittance.

Ugly creature! What, at the close of day, quite dark, brought him
hither?--But, on second thoughts, I believe it was contrived, that he
should be here at supper, to know the result of the conference between
my mother and me, and that my father, on his return, might find us
together.

I was hurrying away, but my mother commanded me (since I had come down
only, as she said, to mock her) not to stir; and at the same time see
if I could behave so to Mr. Solmes, as might encourage her to make the
favourable report to my father which I had besought her to make.

My sister triumphed. I was vexed to be so caught, and to have such an
angry and cutting rebuke given me, with an aspect much more like the
taunting sister than the indulgent mother, if I may presume to say so:
for she herself seemed to enjoy the surprise upon me.

The man stalked in. His usual walk is by pauses, as if (from the same
vacuity of thought which made Dryden's clown whistle) he was telling
his steps: and first paid his clumsy respects to my mother; then to my
sister; next to me, as if I was already his wife, and therefore to be
last in his notice; and sitting down by me, told us in general what
weather it was. Very cold he made it; but I was warm enough. Then
addressing himself to me: And how do you find it, Miss? was his
question; and would have taken my hand.

I withdrew it, I believe with disdain enough. My mother frowned. My
sister bit her lip.

I could not contain myself: I was never so bold in my life; for I went
on with my plea, as if Mr. Solmes had not been there.

My mother coloured, and looked at him, at my sister, and at me. My
sister's eyes were opener and bigger than ever I saw them before.

The man understood me. He hemmed, and removed from one chair to another.

I went on, supplicating for my mother's favourable report: Nothing but
invincible dislike, said I--

What would the girl be at, interrupted my mother? Why, Clary! Is this a
subject!--Is this!--Is this!--Is this a time--And again she looked upon
Mr. Solmes.

I am sorry, on reflection, that I put my mamma into so much
confusion--To be sure it was very saucy in me.

I beg pardon, Madam, said I. But my papa will soon return. And since
I am not permitted to withdraw, it is not necessary, I humbly presume,
that Mr. Solmes's presence should deprive me of this opportunity to
implore your favourable report; and at the same time, if he still visit
on my account [looking at him] to convince him, that it cannot possibly
be to any purpose--

Is the girl mad? said my mother, interrupting me.

My sister, with the affectation of a whisper to my mother--This is--This
is spite, Madam, [very spitefully she spoke the word,] because you
commanded her to stay.

I only looked at her, and turning to my mother, Permit me, Madam, said
I, to repeat my request. I have no brother, no sister!--If I ever lose
my mamma's favour, I am lost for ever!

Mr. Solmes removed to his first seat, and fell to gnawing the head of
his hazel; a carved head, almost as ugly as his own--I did not think the
man was so sensible.

My sister rose, with a face all over scarlet; and stepping to the table,
where lay a fan, she took it up, and, although Mr. Solmes had observed
that the weather was cold, fanned herself very violently.

My mother came to me, and angrily taking my hand, led me out of that
parlour into my own; which, you know, is next to it--Is not this
behaviour very bold, very provoking, think you, Clary?

I beg your pardon, Madam, if it has that appearance to you. But indeed,
my dear Mamma, there seem to be snares laying in wait for me. Too well
I know my brother's drift. With a good word he shall have my consent for
all he wishes to worm me out of--neither he, nor my sister, shall need
to take half this pains--

My mother was about to leave me in high displeasure.

I besought her to stay: One favour, but one favour, dearest Madam, said
I, give me leave to beg of you--

What would the girl?

I see how every thing is working about.--I never, never can think of Mr.
Solmes. My papa will be in tumults when he is told that I cannot. They
will judge of the tenderness of your heart to a poor child who seems
devoted by every one else, from the willingness you have already shewn
to hearken to my prayers. There will be endeavours used to confine me,
and keep me out of your presence, and out of the presence of every one
who used to love me [this, my dear Miss Howe, is threatened]. If this
be effected; if it be put out of my power to plead my own cause, and to
appeal to you, and to my uncle Harlowe, of whom only I have hope; then
will every ear be opened against me, and every tale encouraged--It
is, therefore, my humble request, that, added to the disgraceful
prohibitions I now suffer under, you will not, if you can help it, give
way to my being denied your ear.

Your listening Hannah has given you this intelligence, as she does many
others.

My Hannah, Madam, listens not--My Hannah--

No more in Hannah's behalf--Hannah is known to make mischief--Hannah
is known--But no more of that bold intermeddler--'Tis true your father
threatened to confine you to your chamber, if you complied not, in order
the more assuredly to deprive you of the opportunity of corresponding
with those who harden your heart against his will. He bid me tell you
so, when he went out, if I found you refractory. But I was loth to
deliver so harsh a declaration; being still in hope that you would come
down to us in a compliant temper. Hannah has overheard this, I suppose;
and has told you of it; as also, that he declared he would break your
heart, rather than you should break his. And I now assure you, that you
will be confined, and prohibited making teasing appeals to any of us:
and we shall see who is to submit, you to us, or every body to you.

Again I offered to clear Hannah, and to lay the latter part of the
intelligence to my sister's echo, Betty Barnes, who had boasted of it to
another servant: but I was again bid to be silent on that head. I
should soon find, my mother was pleased to say, that others could be as
determined as I was obstinate: and once for all would add, that since
she saw that I built upon her indulgence, and was indifferent about
involving her in contentions with my father, she would now assure me,
that she was as much determined against Mr. Lovelace, and for Mr. Solmes
and the family schemes, as any body; and would not refuse her consent to
any measures that should be thought necessary to reduce a stubborn child
to her duty.

I was ready to sink. She was so good as to lend me her arm to support
me.

And this, said I, is all I have to hope for from my Mamma?

It is. But, Clary, this one further opportunity I give you--Go in again
to Mr. Solmes, and behave discreetly to him; and let your father find
you together, upon civil terms at least.

My feet moved [of themselves, I think] farther from the parlour where he
was, and towards the stairs; and there I stopped and paused.

If, proceeded she, you are determined to stand in defiance of us
all--then indeed you may go up to your chamber (as you are ready to
do)--And God help you!

God help me, indeed! for I cannot give hope of what I cannot intend--But
let me have your prayers, my dear Mamma!--Those shall have mine, who
have brought me into all this distress.

I was moving to go up--

And will you go up, Clary?

I turned my face to her: my officious tears would needs plead for me: I
could not just then speak, and stood still.

Good girl, distress me not thus!--Dear, good girl, do not thus distress
me! holding out her hand; but standing still likewise.

What can I do, Madam?--What can I do?

Go in again, my child--Go in again, my dear child!--repeated she; and
let your father find you together.

What, Madam, to give him hope?--To give hope to Mr. Solmes?

Obstinate, perverse, undutiful Clarissa! with a rejecting hand, and
angry aspect; then take your own way, and go up!--But stir not down
again, I charge you, without leave, or till your father's pleasure be
known concerning you.

She flung away from me with high indignation: and I went up with a very
heavy heart; and feet as slow as my heart was heavy.


***


My father is come home, and my brother with him. Late as it is, they are
all shut up together. Not a door opens; not a soul stirs. Hannah, as she
moves up and down, is shunned as a person infected.


***


The angry assembly is broken up. My two uncles and my aunt Hervey are
sent for, it seems, to be here in the morning to breakfast. I shall
then, I suppose, know my doom. 'Tis past eleven, and I am ordered not to
go to bed.


TWELVE O'CLOCK.


This moment the keys of every thing are taken from me. It was proposed
to send for me down: but my father said, he could not bear to look upon
me.--Strange alteration in a few weeks!--Shorey was the messenger. The
tears stood in her eyes when she delivered her message.

You, my dear, are happy--May you always be so--and then I can never be
wholly miserable. Adieu, my beloved friend!

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 5.


Hannah has just brought me from the private place in the garden-wall, a
letter from Mr. Lovelace, deposited last night, signed also by Lord M.

He tells me in it, 'That Mr. Solmes makes it his boast, that he is to
be married in a few days to one of the shyest women in England: that my
brother explains his meaning: This shy creature, he says, is me; and
he assures every one, that his younger sister is very soon to be Mr.
Solmes's wife. He tells me of the patterns bespoken which my mother
mentioned to me.'

Not one thing escapes him that is done or said in this house.

'My sister, he says, reports the same things; and that with such
particular aggravations of insult upon him, that he cannot but be
extremely piqued, as well at the manner, as from the occasion; and
expresses himself with great violence upon it.

'He knows not, he says, what my relations' inducements can be to prefer
such a man as Solmes to him. If advantageous settlements be the motive,
Solmes shall not offer what he will refuse to comply with.

'As to his estate and family; the first cannot be excepted against: and
for the second, he will not disgrace himself by a comparison so odious.
He appeals to Lord M. for the regularity of his life and manners ever
since he has made his addresses to me, or had hope of my favour.'

I suppose he would have his Lordship's signing to this letter to be
taken as a voucher for him.

'He desires my leave (in company with my Lord), in a pacific manner,
to attend my father and uncles, in order to make proposals that must be
accepted, if they will see him, and hear what they are: and tells me,
that he will submit to any measures that I shall prescribe, in order to
bring about a reconciliation.'

He presumes to be very earnest with me, 'to give him a private meeting
some night, in my father's garden, attended by whom I please.'

Really, my dear, were you to see his letter, you would think I had given
him great encouragement, and that I am in direct treaty with him; or
that he is sure that my friends will drive me into a foreign protection;
for he has the boldness to offer, in my Lord's name, an asylum to me,
should I be tyrannically treated in Solmes's behalf.

I suppose it is the way of this sex to endeavour to entangle the
thoughtless of ours by bold supposals and offers, in hopes that we shall
be too complaisant or bashful to quarrel with them; and, if not checked,
to reckon upon our silence, as assents voluntarily given, or concessions
made in their favour.

There are other particulars in this letter which I ought to mention to
you: but I will take an opportunity to send you the letter itself, or a
copy of it.

For my own part, I am very uneasy to think how I have been drawn on one
hand, and driven on the other, into a clandestine, in short, into a mere
loverlike correspondence, which my heart condemns.

It is easy to see, if I do not break it off, that Mr. Lovelace's
advantages, by reason of my unhappy situation, will every day increase,
and I shall be more and more entangled. Yet if I do put an end to
it, without making it a condition of being freed from Mr. Solmes's
address--May I, my dear, is it best to continue it a little longer, in
order to extricate myself out of the other difficulty, by giving up all
thoughts of Mr. Lovelace?--Whose advice can I now ask but yours.

All my relations are met. They are at breakfast together. Mr. Solmes is
expected. I am excessively uneasy. I must lay down my pen.


***


They are all going to church together. Grievously disordered they appear
to be, as Hannah tells me. She believes something is resolved upon.


SUNDAY NOON.


What a cruel thing is suspense!--I will ask leave to go to church this
afternoon. I expect to be denied. But, if I do not ask, they may allege,
that my not going is owing to myself.


***


I desired to speak with Shorey. Shorey came. I directed her to carry to
my mother my request for permission to go to church this afternoon. What
think you was the return? Tell her, that she must direct herself to
her brother for any favour she has to ask.--So, my dear, I am to be
delivered up to my brother!

I was resolved, however, to ask of him this favour. Accordingly, when
they sent me up my solitary dinner, I gave the messenger a billet,
in which I made it my humble request through him to my father, to be
permitted to go to church this afternoon.

This was the contemptuous answer: 'Tell her, that her request will be
taken into consideration to-morrow.'

Patience will be the fittest return I can make to such an insult. But
this method will not do with me; indeed it will not! And yet it is but
the beginning, I suppose, of what I am to expect from my brother, now I
am delivered up to him.



On recollection, I thought it best to renew my request. I did. The
following is a copy of what I wrote, and what follows that, of the
answer sent me.


SIR,

I know not what to make of the answer brought to my request of being
permitted to go to church this afternoon. If you designed to shew your
pleasantry by it, I hope that will continue; and then my request will be
granted.

You know, that I never absented myself, when well, and at home, till the
two last Sundays; when I was advised not to go. My present situation is
such, that I never more wanted the benefit of the public prayers.

I will solemnly engage only to go thither, and back again.

I hope it cannot be thought that I would do otherwise.

My dejection of spirits will give a too just excuse on the score
of indisposition for avoiding visits. Nor will I, but by distant
civilities, return the compliments of any of my acquaintances. My
disgraces, if they are to have an end, need not be proclaimed to the
whole world. I ask this favour, therefore, for my reputation's sake,
that I may be able to hold up my head in the neighbourhood, if I live to
see an end of the unmerited severities which seem to be designed for

Your unhappy sister, CL. HARLOWE.



TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

For a girl to lay so much stress upon going to church, and yet resolve
to defy her parents, in an article of the greatest consequence to them,
and to the whole family, is an absurdity. You are recommended, Miss, to
the practice of your private devotions. May they be efficacious upon the
mind of one of the most pervicacious young creatures that ever was heard
of! The intention is, I tell you plainly, to mortify you into a sense
of your duty. The neighbours you are so solicitous to appear well with,
already know, that you defy that. So, Miss, if you have a real value for
your reputation, shew it as you ought. It is yet in your own power to
establish or impair it.

JA. HARLOWE.



Thus, my dear Miss Howe, has my brother got me into his snares; and I,
like a poor silly bird, the more I struggle, am the more entangled.




LETTER XXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY MORNING, MARCH 6.


They are resolved to break my heart. My poor Hannah is
discharged--disgracefully discharged!--Thus it was.

Within half an hour after I had sent the poor girl down for my
breakfast, that bold creature Betty Barnes, my sister's confidant and
servant, (if a favourite maid and confidant can be deemed a servant,)
came up.

What, Miss, will you please to have for breakfast?

I was surprised. What will I have for breakfast,
Betty!--How!--What!--How comes it!--Then I named Hannah. I could not
tell what to say.

Don't be surprised, Miss:--but you'll see Hannah no more in this house.

God forbid!--Is any harm come to Hannah?--What! What is the matter with
Hannah?

Why, Miss, the short and the long is this: Your papa and mamma think
Hannah has staid long enough in the house to do mischief; and so she
is ordered to troop [that was the confident creature's word]; and I am
directed to wait upon you in her stead.

I burst into tears. I have no service for you, Betty Barnes; none at
all. But where is Hannah? Cannot I speak with the poor girl? I owe her
half a year's wages. May I not see the honest creature, and pay her her
wages? I may never see her again perhaps; for they are resolved to break
my heart.

And they think you are resolved to break theirs: so tit for tat, Miss.

Impertinent I called her; and asked her, if it were upon such confident
terms that her service was to begin.

I was so very earnest to see the poor maid, that (to oblige me, as she
said) she went down with my request.

The worthy creature was as earnest to see me; and the favour was granted
in presence of Shorey and Betty.

I thanked her, when she came up, for her past service to me.

Her heart was ready to break. And she began to vindicate her fidelity
and love; and disclaimed any mischief she had ever made.

I told her, that those who occasioned her being turned out of my
service, made no question of her integrity: that her dismission was
intended for an indignity to me: that I was very sorry to be obliged to
part with her, and hoped she would meet with as good a service.

Never, never, wringing her hands, should she meet with a mistress
she loved so well. And the poor creature ran on in my praises, and in
professions of love to me.

We are all apt, you know, my dear, to praise our benefactors, because
they are our benefactors; as if every body did right or wrong, as they
obliged or disobliged us. But this good creature deserved to be kindly
treated; so I could have no merit in favouring one whom it would have
been ungrateful not to distinguish.

I gave her a little linen, some laces, and other odd things; and instead
of four pounds which were due to her, ten guineas: and said, if ever I
were again allowed to be my own mistress, I would think of her in the
first place.

Betty enviously whispered Shorey upon it.

Hannah told me, before their faces, having no other opportunity, that
she had been examined about letters to me, and from me: and that she
had given her pockets to Miss Harlowe, who looked into them, and put her
fingers in her stays, to satisfy herself that she had not any.

She gave me an account of the number of my pheasants and bantams; and I
said, they should be my own care twice or thrice a day.

We wept over each other at parting. The girl prayed for all the family.

To have so good a servant so disgracefully dismissed, is very cruel: and
I could not help saying that these methods might break my heart, but not
any other way answer the end of the authors of my disgraces.

Betty, with a very saucy fleer, said to Shorey, There would be a trial
of skill about that she fancied. But I took no notice of it. If this
wench thinks that I have robbed her young mistress of a lover, as you
say she has given out, she may believe that it is some degree of merit
in herself to be impertinent to me.

Thus have I been forced to part with my faithful Hannah. If you can
command the good creature to a place worthy of her, pray do for my sake.




LETTER XXIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY, NEAR 12 O'CLOCK.


The enclosed letter was just now delivered to me. My brother has carried
all his points.

I send you also the copy of my answer. No more at this time can I
write--!



MONDAY, MAR. 6.

MISS CLARY,


By command of your father and mother I write expressly to forbid you to
come into their presence, or into the garden when they are there: nor
when they are not there, but with Betty Banes to attend you; except by
particular license or command.

On their blessings, you are forbidden likewise to correspond with the
vile Lovelace; as it is well known you did by means of your sly Hannah.
Whence her sudden discharge. As was fit.

Neither are you to correspond with Miss Howe; who has given herself high
airs of late; and might possibly help on your correspondence with that
detested libertine. Nor, in short, with any body without leave.

You are not to enter into the presence of either of your uncles, without
their leave first obtained. It is a mercy to you, after such a behaviour
to your mother, that your father refuses to see you.

You are not to be seen in any apartment of the house you so lately
governed as you pleased, unless you are commanded down.

In short, you are strictly to confine yourself to your chamber, except
now and then, in Betty Barnes's sight (as aforesaid) you take a morning
or evening turn in the garden: and then you are to go directly, and
without stopping at any apartment in the way, up or down the back
stairs, that the sight of so perverse a young creature may not add to
the pain you have given every body.

The hourly threatenings of your fine fellow, as well as your own
unheard-of obstinacy, will account to you for all this. What a hand has
the best and most indulgent of mothers had with you, who so long pleaded
for you, and undertook for you; even when others, from the manner of
your setting out, despaired of moving you!--What must your perverseness
have been, that such a mother can give you up! She thinks it right so to
do: nor will take you to favour, unless you make the first steps, by a
compliance with your duty.

As for myself, whom perhaps you think hardly of [in very good company,
if you do, that is my sole consolation]; I have advised, that you may be
permitted to pursue your own inclinations, (some people need no greater
punishment than such a permission,) and not to have the house encumbered
by one who must give them the more pain for the necessity she has laid
them under of avoiding the sight of her, although in it.

If any thing I have written appear severe or harsh, it is still in your
power (but perhaps will not always be so) to remedy it; and that by a
single word.

Betty Barnes has orders to obey you in all points consistent with her
duty to those whom you owe it, as well as she.

JA. HARLOWE.



TO JAMES HARLOWE, JUNIOR, ESQ.

SIR,

I will only say, That you may congratulate yourself on having so far
succeeded in all your views, that you may report what you please of me,
and I can no more defend myself, than if I were dead. Yet one favour,
nevertheless, I will beg of you. It is this--That you will not occasion
more severities, more disgraces, that are necessary for carrying into
execution your further designs, whatever they be, against

Your unhappy sister, CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 7.


By my last deposit, you will see how I am driven, and what a poor
prisoner I am.--No regard had to my reputation. The whole matter is now
before you. Can such measures be supposed to soften?--But surely they
can only mean to try and frighten me into my brother's views!--All my
hope is, to be able to weather this point till my cousin Morden comes
from Florence; and he is soon expected: yet, if they are determined upon
a short day, I doubt he will not be here in time enough to save me.

It is plain by my brother's letter, that my mother has not spared me, in
the report she was pleased to make of the conference between herself and
me: yet she was pleased to hint to me, that my brother had views which
she would have had me try to disappoint. But indeed she had engaged to
give a faithful account of what was to pass between herself and me: and
it was, doubtless, much more eligible to give up a daughter, than to
disoblige a husband, and every other person of the family.

They think they have done every thing by turning away my poor Hannah:
but as long as the liberty of the garden, and my poultry-visits, are
allowed me, they will be mistaken.

I asked Mrs. Betty, if she had any orders to watch or attend me; or
whether I was to ask her leave whenever I should be disposed to walk in
the garden, or to go feed my bantams?--Lord bless her! what could I mean
by such a question! Yet she owned, that she had heard, that I was not to
go into the garden, when my father, mother, or uncles were there.

However, as it behoved me to be assured on this head, I went down
directly, and staid an hour, without question or impediment; and yet a
good part of the time, I walked under and in sight, as I may say, of my
brother's study window, where both he and my sister happened to be.
And I am sure they saw me, by the loud mirth they affected, by way of
insult, as I suppose.

So this part of my restraint was doubtless a stretch of the authority
given him. The enforcing of that may perhaps come next. But I hope not.


TUESDAY NIGHT.


Since I wrote the above, I ventured to send a letter by Shorey to my
mother. I desired her to give it into her own hand, when nobody was by.

I shall enclose a copy of it. You will see that I would have it thought,
that now Hannah is gone, I have no way to correspond out of the house. I
am far from thinking all I do right. I am afraid this is a little piece
of art, that is not so. But this is an afterthought. The letter went
first.


HONOURED MADAM,

Having acknowledged to you, that I had received letters from Mr.
Lovelace full of resentment, and that I answered them purely to prevent
further mischief, and having shewn you copies of my answers, which you
did not disapprove of, although you thought fit, after you had read
them, to forbid me any further correspondence with him, I think it my
duty to acquaint you, that another letter from him has since come to my
hand, in which he is very earnest with me to permit him to wait on my
papa, or you, or my two uncles, in a pacific way, accompanied by Lord
M.: on which I beg your commands.

I own to you, Madam, that had not the prohibition been renewed, and had
not Hannah been so suddenly dismissed my service, I should have made
the less scruple to have written an answer, and to have commanded her
to convey it to him, with all speed, in order to dissuade him from these
visits, lest any thing should happen on the occasion that my heart aches
but to think of.

And here I cannot but express my grief, that I should have all the
punishment and all the blame, who, as I have reason to think, have
prevented great mischief, and have not been the occasion of any. For,
Madam, could I be supposed to govern the passions of either of the
gentlemen?--Over the one indeed I have had some little influence,
without giving him hitherto any reason to think he has fastened an
obligation upon me for it.--Over the other, Who, Madam, has any?--I am
grieved at heart, to be obliged to lay so great a blame at my brother's
door, although my reputation and my liberty are both to be sacrificed
to his resentment and ambition. May not, however, so deep a sufferer be
permitted to speak out?

This communication being as voluntarily made, as dutifully intended,
I humbly presume to hope, that I shall not be required to produce the
letter itself. I cannot either in honour or prudence do that, because of
the vehemence of his style; for having heard [not, I assure you, by my
means, or through Hannah's] of some part of the harsh treatment I have
met with; he thinks himself entitled to place it to his own account, by
reason of speeches thrown out by some of my relations, equally vehement.

If I do not answer him, he will be made desperate, and think himself
justified (thought I shall not think him so) in resenting the treatment
he complains of: if I do, and if, in compliment to me, he forbears to
resent what he thinks himself entitled to resent; be pleased, Madam, to
consider the obligation he will suppose he lays me under.

If I were as strongly prepossessed in his favour as is supposed, I
should not have wished this to be considered by you. And permit me, as
a still further proof that I am not prepossessed, to beg of you to
consider, Whether, upon the whole, the proposal I made, of declaring for
the single life (which I will religiously adhere to) is not the best way
to get rid of his pretensions with honour. To renounce him, and not be
allowed to aver, that I will never be the other man's, will make him
conclude (driven as I am driven) that I am determined in that other
man's favour.

If this has not its due weight, my brother's strange schemes must be
tried, and I will resign myself to my destiny with all the acquiescence
that shall be granted to my prayers. And so leaving the whole to your
own wisdom, and whether you choose to consult my papa and uncles upon
this humble application, or not; or whether I shall be allowed to write
an answer to Mr. Lovelace, or not [and if allowed to do so, I beg your
direction by whom to send it]; I remain,

Honoured Madam, Your unhappy, but ever dutiful daughter, CL. HARLOWE.


WEDNESDAY MORNING.


I have just received an answer to the enclosed letter. My mother, you
will observe, has ordered me to burn it: but, as you will have it in
your safekeeping, and nobody else will see it, her end will be equally
answered, as if it were burnt. It has neither date nor superscription.


CLARISSA,

Say not all the blame and all the punishment is yours. I am as much
blamed, and as much punished, as you are; yet am more innocent. When
your obstinacy is equal to any other person's passion, blame not your
brother. We judged right, that Hannah carried on your correspondencies.
Now she is gone, and you cannot write [we think you cannot] to Miss
Howe, nor she to you, without our knowledge, one cause of uneasiness and
jealousy is over.

I had no dislike of Hannah. I did not tell her so; because somebody was
within hearing when she desired to pay her duty to me at going. I gave
her a caution, in a raised voice, To take care, wherever she went to
live next, if there were any young ladies, how she made parties, and
assisted in clandestine correspondencies. But I slid two guineas into
her hand: nor was I angry to hear that you were still more bountiful to
her. So much for Hannah.

I don't know what to write, about your answering that man of violence.
What can you think of it, that such a family as ours, should have such
a rod held over it?--For my part, I have not owned that I know you have
corresponded. By your last boldness to me [an astonishing one it was,
to pursue before Mr. Solmes the subject I was forced to break from
above-stairs!] you may, as far as I know, plead, that you had my
countenance for your correspondence with him; and so add to the
uneasiness between your father and me. You were once my comfort,
Clarissa; you made all my hardships tolerable:--But now!--However,
nothing, it is plain, can move you; and I will say no more on that head:
for you are under your father's discipline now; and he will neither be
prescribed to, nor entreated.

I should have been glad to see the letter you tell me of, as I saw the
rest. You say, both honour and prudence forbid you to shew it to me.--O
Clarissa! what think you of receiving letters that honour and prudence
forbid you to shew to a mother!--But it is not for me to see it, if you
would choose to shew it me. I will not be in your secret. I will not
know that you did correspond. And, as to an answer, take your own
methods. But let him know it will be the last you will write. And, if
you do write, I won't see it: so seal it up (if you do) and give it to
Shorey; and she--Yet do not think I give you license to write.

We will be upon no conditions with him, nor will you be allowed to be
upon any. Your father and uncles would have no patience were he to come.
What have you to do to oblige him with your refusal of Mr. Solmes?--Will
not that refusal be to give him hope? And while he has any, can we be
easy or free from his insults? Were even your brother in fault, as that
fault cannot be conquered, is a sister to carry on a correspondence that
shall endanger her brother? But your father has given his sanction to
your brother's dislikes, your uncles', and every body's!--No matter to
whom owing.

As to the rest, you have by your obstinacy put it out of my power to do
any thing for you. Your father takes it upon himself to be answerable
for all consequences. You must not therefore apply to me for favour.
I shall endeavour to be only an observer: Happy, if I could be an
unconcerned one!--While I had power, you would not let me use it as I
would have used it. Your aunt has been forced to engage not to interfere
but by your father's direction. You'll have severe trials. If you have
any favour to hope for, it must be from the mediation of your uncles.
And yet, I believe, they are equally determined: for they make it a
principle, [alas! they never had children!] that that child, who in
marriage is not governed by her parents, is to be given up as a lost
creature!

I charge you, let not this letter be found. Burn it. There is too much
of the mother in it, to a daughter so unaccountably obstinate.

Write not another letter to me. I can do nothing for you. But you can do
every thing for yourself.


***


Now, my dear, to proceed with my melancholy narrative.

After this letter, you will believe, that I could have very little
hopes, that an application directly to my father would stand me in any
stead: but I thought it became me to write, were it but to acquit myself
to myself, that I have left nothing unattempted that has the least
likelihood to restore me to his favour. Accordingly I wrote to the
following effect:


I presume not, I say, to argue with my Papa; I only beg his mercy and
indulgence in this one point, on which depends my present, and perhaps
my future, happiness; and beseech him not to reprobate his child for an
aversion which it is not in her power to conquer. I beg, that I may not
be sacrificed to projects, and remote contingencies. I complain of the
disgraces I suffer in this banishment from his presence, and in being
confined to my chamber. In every thing but this one point, I promise
implicit duty and resignation to his will. I repeat my offers of a
single life; and appeal to him, whether I have ever given him cause to
doubt my word. I beg to be admitted to his, and to my mamma's, presence,
and that my conduct may be under their own eye: and this with the more
earnestness, as I have too much reason to believe that snares are laid
for me; and tauntings and revilings used on purpose to make a handle of
my words against me, when I am not permitted to speak in my own defence.
I conclude with hoping, that my brother's instigations may not rob an
unhappy child of her father.


***


This is the answer, sent without superscription, and unsealed, although
by Betty Barnes, who delivered it with an air, as if she knew the
contents.


WEDNESDAY.

I write, perverse girl; but with all the indignation that your
disobedience deserves. To desire to be forgiven a fault you own, and
yet resolve to persevere in, is a boldness, no more to be equaled,
than passed over. It is my authority you defy. Your reflections upon a
brother, that is an honour to us all, deserve my utmost resentment. I
see how light all relationship sits upon you. The cause I guess at,
too. I cannot bear the reflections that naturally arise from this
consideration. Your behaviour to your too-indulgent and too-fond
mother----But, I have no patience--Continue banished from my presence,
undutiful as you are, till you know how to conform to my will.
Ingrateful creature! Your letter but upbraid me for my past indulgence.
Write no more to me, till you can distinguish better; and till you are
convinced of your duty to

A JUSTLY INCENSED FATHER.


***


This angry letter was accompanied by one from my mother, unsealed, and
unsuperscribed also. Those who take so much pains to confederate every
one against me, I make no doubt, obliged her to bear her testimony
against the poor girl.

My mother's letter being a repetition of some of the severe things that
passed between herself and me, of which I have already informed you, I
shall not need to give you the contents--only thus far, that she also
praises my brother, and blames me for my freedoms with him.




LETTER XXVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY MORN., MARCH 9.


I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace, although I had not answered his
former.

This man, somehow or other, knows every thing that passes in our family.
My confinement; Hanna's dismission; and more of the resentments and
resolutions of my father, uncles, and brother, than I can possibly know,
and almost as soon as the things happen, which he tells me of. He cannot
come at these intelligencies fairly.

He is excessively uneasy upon what he hears; and his expressions, both
of love to me, and resentment to them, are very fervent. He solicits me,
'To engage my honour to him never to have Mr. Solmes.'

I think I may fairly promise him that I will not.

He begs, 'That I will not think he is endeavouring to make to himself
a merit at any man's expense, since he hopes to obtain my favour on the
foot of his own; nor that he seeks to intimidate me into a consideration
for him. But declares, that the treatment he meets with from my family
is of such a nature, that he is perpetually reproached for not resenting
it; and that as well by Lord M. and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, as by
all his other friends: and if he must have no hope from me, he cannot
answer for what his despair will make him do.'

Indeed, he says, 'his relations, the ladies particularly, advise him to
have recourse to a legal remedy: But how, he asks, can a man of honour
go to law for verbal abuses given by people entitled to wear swords?'

You see, my dear, that my mother seems as apprehensive of mischief as
myself; and has indirectly offered to let Shorey carry my answer to the
letter he sent me before.

He is full of the favours of the ladies of his family to me: to whom,
nevertheless, I am personally a stranger; except, that I once saw Miss
Patty Montague at Mrs. Knolly's.

It is natural, I believe, for a person to be the more desirous of making
new friends, in proportion as she loses the favour of old ones. Yet had
I rather appear amiable in the eyes of my own relations, and in your
eyes, than in those of all the world besides--but these four ladies of
his family have such excellent characters, that one cannot but wish to
be thought well of by them. Cannot there be a way to find out, by Mrs.
Fortescue's means, or by Mr. Hickman, who has some knowledge of Lord M.
[covertly, however,] what their opinions are of the present situation of
things in our family; and of the little likelihood there is, that ever
the alliance once approved of by them, can take effect?

I cannot, for my own part, think so well of myself, as to imagine, that
they can wish their kinsman to persevere in his views with regard to me,
through such contempts and discouragements.--Not that it would concern
me, should they advise him to the contrary. By my Lord's signing Mr.
Lovelace's former letter; by Mr. Lovelace's assurances of the continued
favour of all his relations; and by the report of others; I seem still
to stand high in their favour. But, methinks, I should be glad to have
this confirmed to me, as from themselves, by the lips of an indifferent
person; and the rather, because of their fortunes and family; and take
it amiss (as they have reason) to be included by ours in the contempt
thrown upon their kinsman.

Curiosity at present is all my motive: nor will there ever, I hope, be a
stronger, notwithstanding your questionable throbs--even were the merits
of Mr. Lovelace much greater than they are.


***


I have answered his letters. If he takes me at my word, I shall need to
be less solicitous for the opinions of his relations in my favour: and
yet one would be glad to be well thought of by the worthy.

This is the substance of my letter:

'I express my surprise at his knowing (and so early) all that passes
here.'

I assure him, 'That were there not such a man in the world as himself, I
would not have Mr. Solmes.'

I tell him, 'That to return, as I understand he does, defiances for
defiances, to my relations, is far from being a proof with me, either of
his politeness, or of the consideration he pretends to have for me.

'That the moment I hear he visits any of my friends without their
consent, I will make a resolution never to see him more, if I can help
it.'

I apprize him, 'That I am connived at in sending this letter (although
no one has seen the contents) provided it shall be the last I will ever
write to him: that I had more than once told him, that the single life
was my choice; and this before Mr. Solmes was introduced as a visitor
in our family: that Mr. Wyerley, and other gentlemen, knew it to be my
choice, before himself was acquainted with any of us: that I had never
been induced to receive a line from him on the subject, but that I
thought he had not acted ungenerously by my brother; and yet had not
been so handsomely treated by my friends, as he might have expected:
but that had he even my friends on his side, I should have very great
objections to him, were I to get over my choice of a single life, so
really preferable to me as it is; and that I should have declared as
much to him, had I not regarded him as more than a common visiter. On
all these accounts, I desire, that the one more letter, which I will
allow him to deposit in the usual place, may be the very last; and that
only, to acquaint me with his acquiescence that it shall be so; at least
till happier times.'

This last I put in that he may not be quite desperate. But, if he take
me at my word, I shall be rid of one of my tormentors.

I have promised to lay before you all his letters, and my answers: I
repeat that promise: and am the less solicitous, for that reason, to
amplify upon the contents of either. But I cannot too often express my
vexation, to be driven to such streights and difficulties, here at
home, as oblige me to answer letters, (from a man I had not absolutely
intended to encourage, and to whom I had really great objections,)
filled as his are with such warm protestations, and written to me with a
spirit of expectation.

For, my dear, you never knew so bold a supposer. As commentators find
beauties in an author, to which the author perhaps was a stranger; so he
sometimes compliments me in high strains of gratitude for favours, and
for a consideration, which I never designed him; insomuch that I am
frequently under a necessity of explaining away the attributed goodness
to him, which, if I shewed, I should have the less opinion of myself.

In short, my dear, like a restiff horse, (as I have heard described by
sportsmen,) he pains one's hands, and half disjoints one's arms, to rein
him in. And, when you see his letters, you must form no judgment upon
them, till you have read my answers. If you do, you will indeed think
you have cause to attribute self-deceit, and throbs, and glows, to your
friend: and yet, at other times, the contradictory nature complains,
that I shew him as little favour, and my friends as much inveteracy,
as if, in the rencontre betwixt my brother and him, he had been the
aggressor; and as if the catastrophe had been as fatal, as it might have
been.

If he has a design by this conduct (sometimes complaining of my shyness,
at others exalting in my imaginary favours) to induce me at one time to
acquiesce with his compliments; at another to be more complaisant
for his complaints; and if the contradiction be not the effect of his
inattention and giddiness; I shall think him as deep and as artful (too
probably, as practised) a creature, as ever lived; and were I to be sure
of it, should hate him, if possible, worse than I do Solmes.

But enough for the present of a creature so very various.




LETTER XXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 9.


I have not patience with any of the people you are with. I know not what
to advise you to do. How do you know that you are not punishable
for being the cause, though to your own loss, that the will of your
grandfather is not complied with?--Wills are sacred things, child. You
see, that they, even they, think so, who imagine they suffer by a will,
through the distinction paid you in it.

I allow of all your noble reasonings for what you did at the time: But,
since such a charming, such a generous instance of filial duty is to go
thus unrewarded, why should you not resume?

Your grandfather knew the family-failing. He knew what a noble spirit
you had to do good. He himself, perhaps, [excuse me, my dear,] had done
too little in his life-time; and therefore he put it in your power to
make up for the defects of the whole family. Were it to me, I would
resume it. Indeed I would.

You will say, you cannot do it, while you are with them. I don't know
that. Do you think they can use you worse than they do? And is it not
your right? And do they not make use of your own generosity to oppress
you? Your uncle Harlowe is one trustee; your cousin Morden is the other:
insist upon your right to your uncle; and write to your cousin Morden
about it. This, I dare say, will make them alter their behaviour to you.

Your insolent brother--what has he to do to controul you?--Were it me [I
wish it were for one month, and no more] I'd shew him the difference. I
would be in my own mansion, pursuing my charming schemes, and making all
around me happy. I would set up my own chariot. I would visit them when
they deserved it. But when my brother and sister gave themselves airs,
I would let them know, that I was their sister, and not their servant:
and, if that did not do, I would shut my gates against them; and bid
them go and be company for each other.

It must be confessed, however, that this brother and sister of yours,
judging as such narrow spirits will ever judge, have some reason for
treating you as they do. It must have long been a mortification to
them (set disappointed love on her side, and avarice on his, out of the
question) to be so much eclipsed by a younger sister. Such a sun in a
family, where there are none but faint twinklers, how could they bear
it! Why, my dear, they must look upon you as a prodigy among them: and
prodigies, you know, though they obtain our admiration, never attract
our love. The distance between you and them is immense. Their eyes ache
to look up at you. What shades does your full day of merit cast
upon them! Can you wonder, then, that they should embrace the first
opportunity that offered, to endeavour to bring you down to their level?

Depend upon it, my dear, you will have more of it, and more still, as
you bear it.

As to this odious Solmes, I wonder not at your aversion to him. It is
needless to say any thing to you, who have so sincere any antipathy to
him, to strengthen your dislike: Yet, who can resist her own talents?
One of mine, as I have heretofore said, is to give an ugly likeness.
Shall I indulge it?--I will. And the rather, as, in doing so, you
will have my opinion in justification of your aversion to him, and
in approbation of a steadiness that I ever admired, and must for ever
approve of, in your temper.

'I was twice in this wretch's company. At one of the times your Lovelace
was there. I need not mention to you, who have such a pretty curiosity,
(though at present, only a curiosity, you know,) the unspeakable
difference.

'Lovelace entertained the company in his lively gay way, and made
every body laugh at one of his stories. It was before this creature was
thought of for you. Solmes laughed too. It was, however, his laugh: for
his first three years, at least, I imagine, must have been one continual
fit of crying; and his muscles have never yet been able to recover a
risible tone. His very smile [you never saw him smile, I believe; never
at least gave him cause to smile] is so little natural to his features,
that it appears to him as hideous as the grin of a man in malice.

'I took great notice of him, as I do of all the noble lords of the
creation, in their peculiarities; and was disgusted, nay, shocked at
him, even then. I was glad, I remember, on that particular occasion,
to see his strange features recovering their natural gloominess; though
they did this but slowly, as if the muscles which contributed to his
distortions, had turned upon rusty springs.

'What a dreadful thing must even the love of such a husband be! For my
part, were I his wife! (But what have I done to myself, to make such a
supposition?) I should never have comfort but in his absence, or when
I was quarreling with him. A splenetic woman, who must have somebody to
find fault with, might indeed be brought to endure such a wretch:
the sight of him would always furnish out the occasion, and all her
servants, for that reason, and for that only, would have cause to blame
their master. But how grievous and apprehensive a thing it must be for
his wife, had she the least degree of delicacy, to catch herself in
having done something to oblige him?

'So much for his person. As to the other half of him, he is said to be
an insinuating, creeping mortal to any body he hopes to be a gainer by:
an insolent, overbearing one, where he has no such views: And is not
this the genuine spirit of meanness? He is reported to be spiteful and
malicious, even to the whole family of any single person who has once
disobliged him; and to his own relations most of all. I am told, that
they are none of them such wretches as himself. This may be one reason
why he is for disinheriting them.

'My Kitty, from one of his domestics, tells me, that his tenants hate
him: and that he never had a servant who spoke well of him. Vilely
suspicious of their wronging him (probably from the badness of his own
heart) he is always changing.

'His pockets, they say, are continually crammed with keys: so that, when
he would treat a guest, (a friend he has not out of your family), he is
half as long puzzling which is which, as his niggardly treat might be
concluded in. And if it be wine, he always fetches it himself. Nor has
he much trouble in doing so; for he has very few visiters--only those,
whom business or necessity brings: for a gentleman who can help it,
would rather be benighted, than put up at his house.'

Yet this is the man they have found out (for considerations as sordid as
those he is governed by) for a husband, that is to say, for a lord and
master, for Miss Clarissa Harlowe!

But, perhaps, he may not be quite so miserable as he is represented.
Characters extremely good, or extremely bad, are seldom justly given.
Favour for a person will exalt the one, as disfavour will sink the
other. But your uncle Antony has told my mother, who objected to his
covetousness, that it was intended to tie him up, as he called it, to
your own terms; which would be with a hempen, rather than a matrimonial,
cord, I dare say. But, is not this a plain indication, that even his
own recommenders think him a mean creature; and that he must be articled
with--perhaps for necessaries? But enough, and too much, of such a
wretch as this!--You must not have him, my dear,--that I am clear
in--though not so clear, how you will be able to avoid it, except you
assert the independence to which your estate gives you a title.


***


Here my mother broke in upon me. She wanted to see what I had written. I
was silly enough to read Solmes's character to her.

She owned, that the man was not the most desirable of men; and that he
had not the happiest appearance: But what, said she, is person in a man?
And I was chidden for setting you against complying with your father's
will. Then followed a lecture on the preference to be given in favour of
a man who took care to discharge all his obligations to the world, and
to keep all together, in opposition to a spendthrift or profligate. A
fruitful subject you know, whether any particular person be meant by it,
or not.

Why will these wise parents, by saying too much against the persons they
dislike, put one upon defending them? Lovelace is not a spendthrift;
owes not obligations to the world; though, I doubt not, profligate
enough. Then, putting one upon doing such but common justice, we
must needs be prepossessed, truly!--And so perhaps we are put upon
curiosities first, that is to say, how such a one or his friends may
think of one: and then, but too probably, comes in a distinguishing
preference, or something that looks exceedingly like it.

My mother charged me at last, to write that side over again.--But
excuse me, my good Mamma! I would not have the character lost upon any
consideration; since my vein ran freely into it: and I never wrote to
please myself, but I pleased you. A very good reason why--we have but
one mind between us--only, that sometimes you are a little too grave,
methinks; I, no doubt, a little too flippant in your opinion.

This difference in our tempers, however, is probably the reason that we
love one another so well, that in the words of Norris, no third love can
come in betwixt. Since each, in the other's eye, having something amiss,
and each loving the other well enough to bear being told of it (and the
rather perhaps as neither wishes to mend it); this takes off a good deal
from that rivalry which might encourage a little (if not a great deal)
of that latent spleen, which in time might rise into envy, and that into
ill-will. So, my dear, if this be the case, let each keep her fault, and
much good may do her with it: and what an hero or heroine must he or
she be, who can conquer a constitutional fault? Let it be avarice, as in
some I dare not name: let it be gravity, as in my best friend: or let it
be flippancy, as in--I need not say whom.

It is proper to acquaint you, that I was obliged to comply with my
mother's curiosity, [my mother has her share, her full share, of
curiosity, my dear,] and to let her see here-and-there some passages in
your letters--

I am broken in upon--but I will tell you by-and-by what passed between
my mother and me on this occasion--and the rather, as she had her GIRL,
her favourite HICKMAN, and your LOVELACE, all at once in her eye, in her
part of the conversation.

Thus it was.

'I cannot but think, Nancy, said she, after all, that there is a little
hardship in Miss Harlowe's case: and yet (as her mother says) it is
a grating thing to have a child, who was always noted for her duty
in smaller points, to stand in opposition to her parents' will in the
greater; yea, in the greatest of all. And now, to middle the matter
between both, it is pity, that the man they favour has not that sort of
merit which a person of a mind so delicate as that of Miss Harlowe might
reasonably expect in a husband.--But then, this man is surely preferable
to a libertine: to a libertine too, who has had a duel with her own
brother; fathers and mothers must think so, were it not for that
circumstance--and it is strange if they do not know best.'

And so they must, thought I, from their experience, if no little dirty
views give them also that prepossession in one man's favour, which they
are so apt to censure their daughters for having in another's--and
if, as I may add in your case, they have no creeping, old, musty uncle
Antonys to strengthen their prepossessions, as he does my mother's.
Poor, creeping, positive soul, what has such an old bachelor as he to
do, to prate about the duties of children to parents; unless he had a
notion that parents owe some to their children? But your mother, by her
indolent meekness, let me call it, has spoiled all the three brothers.

'But you see, child, proceeded my mother, what a different behaviour
MINE is to YOU. I recommend to you one of the soberest, yet politest,
men in England--'

I think little of my mother's politest, my dear. She judges of honest
Hickman for her daughter, as she would have done, I suppose, twenty
years ago, for herself.

'Of a good family, continued my mother; a fine, clear, and improving
estate [a prime consideration with my mother, as well as with some other
folks, whom you know]: and I beg and I pray you to encourage him: at
least not to use him the worse, for his being so obsequious to you.'

Yes, indeed! To use him kindly, that he may treat me familiarly--but
distance to the men-wretches is best--I say.

'Yet all will hardly prevail upon you to do as I would have you. What
would you say, were I to treat you as Miss Harlowe's father and mother
treat her?

'What would I say, Madam!--That's easily answered. I would say nothing.
Can you think such usage, and to such a young lady, is to be borne?

'Come, come, Nancy, be not so hasty: you have heard but one side; and
that there is more to be said is plain, by your reading to me but parts
of her letters. They are her parents. They must know best. Miss Harlowe,
as fine a child as she is, must have done something, must have said
something, (you know how they loved her,) to make them treat her thus.

'But if she should be blameless, Madam, how does your own supposition
condemn them?'

Then came up Solmes's great estate; his good management of it--'A little
too NEAR indeed,' was the word!--[O how money-lovers, thought I, will
palliate! Yet my mother is a princess in spirit to this Solmes!] 'What
strange effects, added she, have prepossession and love upon young
ladies!'

I don't know how it is, my dear; but people take high delight in finding
out folks in love. Curiosity begets curiosity. I believe that's the
thing.

She proceeded to praise Mr. Lovelace's person, and his qualifications
natural and acquired. But then she would judge as mothers will judge,
and as daughters are very loth to judge: but could say nothing in answer
to your offer of living single; and breaking with him--if--if--[three or
four if's she made of one good one, if] that could be depended on.

But still obedience without reserve, reason what I will, is the burden
of my mother's song: and this, for my sake, as well as for yours.

I must needs say, that I think duty to parents is a very meritorious
excellence. But I bless God I have not your trials. We can all be good
when we have no temptation nor provocation to the contrary: but few
young persons (who can help themselves too as you can) would bear what
you bear.

I will now mention all that is upon my mind, in relation to the
behaviour of your father and uncles, and the rest of them, because
I would not offend you: but I have now a higher opinion of my own
sagacity, than ever I had, in that I could never cordially love any one
of your family but yourself. I am not born to like them. But it is my
duty to be sincere to my friend: and this will excuse her Anna Howe to
Miss Clarissa Harlowe.

I ought indeed to have excepted your mother; a lady to be reverenced:
and now to be pitied. What must have been her treatment, to be thus
subjugated, as I may call it? Little did the good old viscount think,
when he married his darling, his only daughter, to so well-appearing a
gentleman, and to her own liking too, that she would have been so much
kept down. Another would call your father a tyrant, if I must not: all
the world that know him, do call him so; and if you love your mother,
you should not be very angry at the world for taking that liberty.

Yet, after all, I cannot help thinking, that she is the less to be
pitied, as she may be said (be the gout, or what will, the occasion
of his moroseness) to have long behaved unworthy of her birth and fine
qualities, in yielding so much as she yields to encroaching spirits
[you may confine the reflection to your brother, if it will pain you
to extend it]; and this for the sake of preserving a temporary peace to
herself; which was the less worth endeavouring to preserve, as it always
produced a strength in the will of others, which subjected her to an
arbitrariness that of course grew, and became established, upon her
patience.--And now to give up the most deserving of her children
(against her judgment) a sacrifice to the ambition and selfishness of
the least deserving!--But I fly from this subject--having I fear, said
too much to be forgiven--and yet much less than is in my heart to say
upon the over-meek subject.

Mr. Hickman is expected from London this evening. I have desired him to
inquire after Lovelace's life and conversation in town. If he has not
inquired, I shall be very angry with him. Don't expect a very good
account of either. He is certainly an intriguing wretch, and full of
inventions.

Upon my word, I most heartily despise that sex! I wish they would let
our fathers and mothers alone; teasing them to tease us with their
golden promises, and protestations and settlements, and the rest
of their ostentatious nonsense. How charmingly might you and I live
together, and despise them all!--But to be cajoled, wire-drawn,
and ensnared, like silly birds, into a state of bondage, or vile
subordination; to be courted as princesses for a few weeks, in order to
be treated as slaves for the rest of our lives. Indeed, my dear, as you
say of Solmes, I cannot endure them!--But for your relations [friends no
more will I call them, unworthy as they are even of the other name!]
to take such a wretch's price as that; and to the cutting off of all
reversions from his own family:--How must a mind but commonly just
resist such a measure!

Mr. Hickman shall sound Lord M. upon the subject you recommend. But
beforehand, I can tell you what he and what his sisters will say, when
they are sounded. Who would not be proud of such a relation as Miss
Clarissa Harlowe?--Mrs. Fortescue told me, that they are all your very
great admirers.

If I have not been clear enough in my advice about what you shall do,
let me say, that I can give it in one word: it is only by re-urging you
to RESUME. If you do, all the rest will follow.

We are told here, that Mrs. Norton, as well as your aunt Hervey, has
given her opinion on the implicit side of the question. If she can
think, that the part she has had in your education, and your own
admirable talents and acquirements, are to be thrown away upon such a
worthless creature as Solmes, I could heartily quarrel with her. You may
think I say this to lessen your regard for the good woman. And perhaps
not wholly without cause, if you do. For, to own the truth, methinks,
I don't love her so well as I should do, did you love her so apparently
less, that I could be out of doubt, that you love me better.

Your mother tells you, 'That you will have great trials: that you are
under your father's discipline.'--The word is enough for me to despise
them who give occasion for its use.--'That it is out of her power to
help you!' And again: 'That if you have any favour to hope for, it must
be by the mediation of your uncles.' I suppose you will write to the
oddities, since you are forbid to see them. But can it be, that such a
lady, such a sister, such a wife, such a mother, has no influence in her
own family? Who, indeed, as you say, if this be so, would marry, that
can live single? My choler is again beginning to rise. RESUME, my dear:
and that is all I will give myself time to say further, lest I offend
you when I cannot serve you--only this, that I am

Your truly affectionate friend and servant, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, MARCH 10.


You will permit me, my dear, to touch upon a few passages in your last
letter, that affect me sensibly.

In the first place, you must allow me to say, low as I am in spirits,
that I am very angry with you, for your reflections on my relations,
particularly on my father and mother, and on the memory of my
grandfather. Nor, my dear, does your own mother always escape the keen
edge of your vivacity. One cannot one's self forbear to write or speak
freely of those we love and honour, when grief from imagined hard
treatment wrings the heart: but it goes against one to hear any body
else take the same liberties. Then you have so very strong a manner of
expression where you take a distaste, that when passion has subdued,
and I come (upon reflection) to see by your severity what I have given
occasion for, I cannot help condemning myself.

But least of all can I bear that you should reflect upon my mother.
What, my dear, if her meekness should not be rewarded? Is the want of
reward, or the want even of a grateful acknowledgement, a reason for us
to dispense with what we think our duty? They were my father's lively
spirits that first made him an interest in her gentle bosom. They were
the same spirits turned inward, as I have heretofore observed,* that
made him so impatient when the cruel malady seized him. He always loved
my mother: And would not LOVE and PITY excusably, nay laudably, make a
good wife (who was an hourly witness of his pangs, when labouring under
a paroxysm, and his paroxysms becoming more and more frequent, as well
as more and more severe) give up her own will, her own likings,
to oblige a husband, thus afflicted, whose love for her was
unquestionable?--And if so, was it not too natural [human nature is not
perfect, my dear] that the husband thus humoured by the wife, should be
unable to bear controul from any body else, much less contradiction from
his children?


     * See Letter V.


If then you would avoid my highest displeasure, you must spare my
mother: and, surely, you will allow me, with her, to pity, as well as to
love and honour my father.

I have no friend but you to whom I can appeal, to whom I dare complain.
Unhappily circumstanced as I am, it is but too probable that I shall
complain, because it is but too probably that I shall have more and more
cause given me for complaint. But be it your part, if I do, to sooth my
angry passions, and to soften my resentments; and this the rather, as
you know what an influence your advice has upon me; and as you must
also know, that the freedoms you take with my friends, can have no other
tendency, but to weaken the sense of my duty to them, without answering
any good end to myself.

I cannot help owning, however, that I am pleased to have you join with
me in opinion of the contempt which Mr. Solmes deserves from me. But
yet, permit me to say, that he is not quite so horrible a creature as
you make him: as to his person, I mean; for with regard to his mind,
by all I have heard, you have done him but justice: but you have such
a talent at an ugly likeness, and such a vivacity, that they sometimes
carry you out of verisimilitude. In short, my dear, I have known you, in
more instances than one, sit down resolved to write all that wit, rather
than strict justice, could suggest upon the given occasion. Perhaps it
may be thought, that I should say the less on this particular subject,
because your dislike of him arises from love to me: But should it not be
our aim to judge of ourselves, and of every thing that affects us, as
we may reasonably imagine other people would judge of us and of our
actions?

As to the advice you give, to resume my estate, I am determined not to
litigate with my father, let what will be the consequence to myself.
I may give you, at another time, a more particular answer to your
reasonings on this subject: but, at present, will only observe, that
it is in my opinion, that Lovelace himself would hardly think me worth
addressing, were he to know this would be my resolution. These men, my
dear, with all their flatteries, look forward to the PERMANENT. Indeed,
it is fit they should. For love must be a very foolish thing to look
back upon, when it has brought persons born to affluence into indigence,
and laid a generous mind under obligation and dependence.

You very ingeniously account for the love we bear to one another, from
the difference in our tempers. I own, I should not have thought of that.
There may possibly be something in it: but whether there be or not,
whenever I am cool, and give myself time to reflect, I will love you the
better for the correction you give, be as severe as you will upon me.
Spare me not, therefore, my dear friend, whenever you think me in the
least faulty. I love your agreeable raillery: you know I always did:
nor, however over-serious you think me, did I ever think you flippant,
as you harshly call it. One of the first conditions of our mutual
friendship was, each should say or write to the other whatever was upon
her mind, without any offence to be taken: a condition, that is indeed
indispensable in friendship.

I knew your mother would be for implicit obedience in a child. I am
sorry my case is so circumstanced, that I cannot comply. It would be
my duty to do so, if I could. You are indeed very happy, that you have
nothing but your own agreeable, yet whimsical, humours to contend with,
in the choice she invites you to make of Mr. Hickman. How happy I should
be, to be treated with so much lenity!--I should blush to have my mother
say, that she begged and prayed me, and all in vain, to encourage a man
so unexceptionable as Mr. Hickman.

Indeed, my beloved Miss Howe, I am ashamed to have your mother say, with
ME in her view, 'What strange effects have prepossession and love upon
young creatures of our sex!' This touches me the more sensibly, because
you yourself, my dear, are so ready to persuade me into it.

I should be very blamable to endeavour to hide any the least bias
upon my mind, from you: and I cannot but say--that this man--this
Lovelace--is a man that might be liked well enough, if he bore such
a character as Mr. Hickman bears; and even if there were hopes of
reclaiming him. And further still I will acknowledge, that I believe it
possible that one might be driven, by violent measures, step by step, as
it were, into something that might be called--I don't know what to
call it--a conditional kind of liking, or so. But as to the word
LOVE--justifiable and charming as it is in some cases, (that is to say,
in all the relative, in all the social, and, what is still beyond both,
in all our superior duties, in which it may be properly called divine;)
it has, methinks, in the narrow, circumscribed, selfish, peculiar sense,
in which you apply it to me, (the man too so little to be approved of
for his morals, if all that report says of him be true,) no pretty sound
with it. Treat me as freely as you will in all other respects, I will
love you, as I have said, the better for your friendly freedom. But,
methinks, I could be glad that you would not let this imputation pass so
glibly from your pen, or your lips, as attributable to one of your own
sex, whether I be the person or not: since the other must have a double
triumph, when a person of your delicacy (armed with such contempts of
them all, as you would have one think) can give up a friend, with an
exultation over her weakness, as a silly, love-sick creature.

I could make some other observations upon the contents of your last two
letters; but my mind is not free enough at present. The occasion for the
above stuck with me; and I could not help taking the earliest notice of
them.

Having written to the end of my second sheet, I will close this letter,
and in my next, acquaint you with all that has happened here since my
last.




LETTER XXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SATURDAY, MARCH 11.


I have had such taunting messages, and such repeated avowals of ill
offices, brought me from my brother and sister, if I do no comply with
their wills, (delivered, too, with provoking sauciness by Betty Barnes,)
that I have thought it proper, before I entered upon my intended address
to my uncles, in pursuance of the hint given me in my mother's letter,
to expostulate a little with them. But I have done it in such a manner,
as will give you (if you please to take it as you have done some parts
of my former letters) great advantage over me. In short, you will have
more cause than ever, to declare me far gone in love, if my reasons for
the change of my style in these letters, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, do
not engage your more favourable opinion.--For I have thought proper to
give them their own way: and, since they will have it, that I have a
preferable regard for Mr. Lovelace, I give them cause rather to confirm
their opinion than doubt it.

These are my reasons in brief, for the alteration of my style.

In the first place, they have grounded their principal argument for my
compliance with their will, upon my acknowledgement that my heart is
free; and so, supposing I give up no preferable person, my opposition
has the look of downright obstinacy in their eyes; and they argue,
that at worst, my aversion to Solmes is an aversion that may be easily
surmounted, and ought to be surmounted in duty to my father, and for the
promotion of family views.

Next, although they build upon this argument in order to silence me,
they seem not to believe me, but treat me as disgracefully, as if I
were in love with one of my father's footmen: so that my conditional
willingness to give up Mr. Lovelace has procured me no favour.

In the next place, I cannot but think, that my brother's antipathy
to Mr. Lovelace is far from being well grounded: the man's inordinate
passion for the sex is the crime that is always rung in my ears: and a
very great one it is: But, does my brother recriminate upon him thus
in love to me?--No--his whole behaviour shews me, that that is not
his principal motive, and that he thinks me rather in his way than
otherwise.

It is then the call of justice, as I may say, to speak a little in
favour of a man, who, although provoked by my brother, did not do
him all the mischief he could have done him, and which my brother had
endeavoured to do him. It might not be amiss therefore, I thought, to
alarm them a little with apprehension, that the methods they are taking
with me are the very reverse of those they should take to answer the end
they design by them. And after all, what is the compliment I make Mr.
Lovelace, if I allow it to be thought that I do really prefer him to
such a man as him they terrify me with? Then, my Miss Howe [concluded I]
accuses me of a tameness which subject me to insults from my brother: I
will keep that dear friend in my eye; and for all these considerations,
try what a little of her spirit will do--sit it ever so awkwardly upon
me.

In this way of thinking, I wrote to my brother and sister. This is my
letter to him.



TREATED as I am, and, in a great measure, if not wholly, by your
instigations, Brother, you must permit me to expostulate with you upon
the occasion. It is not my intention to displease you in what I am going
to write: and yet I must deal freely with you: the occasion calls for
it.

And permit me, in the first place, to remind you, that I am your sister;
and not your servant; and that, therefore, the bitter revilings and
passionate language brought me from you, upon an occasion in which you
have no reason to prescribe to me, are neither worthy of my character to
bear, nor of yours to offer.

Put the case, that I were to marry the man you dislike: and that he were
not to make a polite or tender husband, Is that a reason for you to be
an unpolite and disobliging brother?--Why must you, Sir, anticipate my
misfortunes, were such a case to happen?--Let me tell you plainly,
that the man who could treat me as a wife, worse than you of late have
treated me as a sister, must be a barbarous man indeed.

Ask yourself, I pray you, Sir, if you would thus have treated your
sister Bella, had she thought fit to receive the addresses of the man so
much hated by you?--If not, let me caution you, my Brother, not to take
your measures by what you think will be borne, but rather by what ought
to be offered.

How would you take it, if you had a brother, who, in a like case, were
to act by you, as you do by me?--You cannot but remember what a laconic
answer you gave even to my father, who recommended to you Miss Nelly
D'Oily--You did not like her, were your words: and that was thought
sufficient.

You must needs think, that I cannot but know to whom to attribute my
disgraces, when I recollect my father's indulgence to me, permitting
me to decline several offers; and to whom, that a common cause is
endeavoured to be made, in favour of a man whose person and manners
are more exceptional than those of any of the gentlemen I have been
permitted to refuse.

I offer not to compare the two men together: nor is there indeed the
least comparison to be made between them. All the difference to
the one's disadvantage, if I did, is but one point--of the greatest
importance, indeed--But to whom of most importance?--To myself, surely,
were I to encourage his application: of the least to you. Nevertheless,
if you do not, by your strange politics, unite that man and me as joint
sufferers in one cause, you shall find me as much resolved to renounce
him, as I am to refuse the other. I have made an overture to this
purpose: I hope you will not give me reason to confirm my apprehensions,
that it will be owing to you if it be not accepted.

It is a sad thing to have it to say, without being conscious of ever
having given you cause of offence, that I have in you a brother, but not
a friend.

Perhaps you will not condescend to enter into the reasons of your
late and present conduct with a foolish sister. But if politeness, if
civility, be not due to that character, and to my sex, justice is.

Let me take the liberty further to observe, that the principal end of
a young man's education at the university, is, to learn him to reason
justly, and to subdue the violence of his passions. I hope, Brother,
that you will not give room for any body who knows us both, to conclude,
that the toilette has taught the one more of the latter doctrine, than
the university has taught the other. I am truly sorry to have cause
to say, that I have heard it often remarked, that your uncontrouled
passions are not a credit to your liberal education.

I hope, Sir, that you will excuse the freedom I have taken with you: you
have given me too much reason for it, and you have taken much greater
with me, without reason:--so, if you are offended, ought to look at the
cause, and not at the effect:--then examining yourself, that cause will
cease, and there will not be any where a more accomplished gentleman
than my brother.

Sisterly affection, I do assure you, Sir, (unkindly as you have used
me,) and not the pertness which of late you have been so apt to impute
to me, is my motive in this hint. Let me invoke your returning kindness,
my only brother! And give me cause, I beseech you, to call you my
compassionating friend. For I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate sister, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


***


This is my brother's answer.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

I KNOW there will be no end of your impertinent scribble, if I don't
write to you. I write therefore: but, without entering into argument
with such a conceited and pert preacher and questioner, it is, to forbid
you to plague me with your quaint nonsense. I know not what wit in a
woman is good for, but to make her overvalue herself, and despise every
other person. Yours, Miss Pert, has set you above your duty, and above
being taught or prescribed to, either by parents, or any body else. But
go on, Miss: your mortification will be the greater; that's all, child.
It shall, I assure you, if I can make it so, so long as you prefer that
villainous Lovelace, (who is justly hated by all your family) to every
body. We see by your letter now (what we too justly suspected before),
most evidently we see, the hold he has got of your forward heart. But
the stronger the hold, the greater must be the force (and you shall have
enough of that) to tear such a miscreant from it. In me, notwithstanding
your saucy lecturing, and your saucy reflections before, you are sure of
a friend, as well as of a brother, if it be not your own fault. But if
you will still think of such a wretch as that Lovelace, never expect
either friend or brother in

JA. HARLOWE.


***


I will now give you a copy of my letter to my sister; with her answer.


IN what, my dear Sister, have I offended you, that instead of
endeavouring to soften my father's anger against me, (as I am sure I
should have done for you, had my unhappy case been yours,) you should,
in so hard-hearted a manner, join to aggravate not only his displeasure,
but my mother's against me. Make but my case your own, my dear Bella;
and suppose you were commanded to marry Mr. Lovelace, (to whom you
are believed to have such an antipathy,) would you not think it a very
grievous injunction?--Yet cannot your dislike to Mr. Lovelace be greater
than mine is to Mr. Solmes. Nor are love and hatred voluntary passions.

My brother may perhaps think it a proof of a manly spirit, to shew
himself an utter stranger to the gentle passions. We have both heard him
boast, that he never loved with distinction: and, having predominating
passions, and checked in his first attempt, perhaps he never will. It
is the less wonder, then, raw from the college, so lately himself the
tutored, that he should set up for a tutor, a prescriber to our
gentler sex, whose tastes and manners are differently formed: for what,
according to his account, are colleges, but classes of tyrants, from
the upper students over the lower, and from them to the tutor?--That he,
with such masculine passions should endeavour to controul and bear down
an unhappy sister, in a case where his antipathy, and, give me leave
to say, his ambition [once you would have allowed the latter to be his
fault] can be gratified by so doing, may not be quite so much to be
wondered at--but that a sister should give up the cause of a sister, and
join with him to set her father and mother against her, in a case that
might have been her own--indeed, my Bella, this is not pretty in you.

There was a time that Mr. Lovelace was thought reclaimable, and when it
was far from being deemed a censurable view to hope to bring back to the
paths of virtue and honour, a man of his sense and understanding. I am
far from wishing to make the experiment: but nevertheless will say, that
if I have not a regard for him, the disgraceful methods taken to compel
me to receive the addresses of such a man as Mr. Solmes are enough to
induce it.

Do you, my Sister, for one moment, lay aside all prejudice, and compare
the two men in their births, their educations, their persons, their
understandings, their manners, their air, and their whole deportments;
and in their fortunes too, taking in reversions; and then judge of both;
yet, as I have frequently offered, I will live single with all my heart,
if that will do.

I cannot thus live in displeasure and disgrace. I would, if I could,
oblige all my friends. But will it be just, will it be honest, to marry
a man I cannot endure? If I have not been used to oppose the will of
my father, but have always delighted to oblige and obey, judge of the
strength of my antipathy, by the painful opposition I am obliged to
make, and cannot help it.

Pity then, my dearest Bella, my sister, my friend, my companion, my
adviser, as you used to be when I was happy, and plead for

Your ever-affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.


***


TO MISS CLARY HARLOWE

Let it be pretty or not pretty, in your wise opinion, I shall speak my
mind, I will assure you, both of you and your conduct in relation
to this detested Lovelace. You are a fond foolish girl with all your
wisdom. Your letter shews that enough in twenty places. And as to your
cant of living single, nobody will believe you. This is one of your
fetches to avoid complying with your duty, and the will of the most
indulgent parents in the world, as yours have been to you, I am
sure--though now they see themselves finely requited for it.

We all, indeed, once thought your temper soft and amiable: but why was
it? You never were contradicted before: you had always your own way. But
no sooner do you meet with opposition in your wishes to throw yourself
away upon a vile rake, but you shew what you are. You cannot love Mr.
Solmes! that's the pretence; but Sister, Sister, let me tell you, that
is because Lovelace has got into your fond heart:--a wretch hated,
justly hated, by us all; and who has dipped his hands in the blood of
your brother: yet him you would make our relation, would you?

I have no patience with you, but for putting the case of my liking such
a vile wretch as him. As to the encouragement you pretend he received
formerly from all our family, it was before we knew him to be so vile:
and the proofs that had such force upon us, ought to have had some upon
you:--and would, had you not been a foolish forward girl; as on this
occasion every body sees you are.

O how you run out in favour of the wretch!--His birth, his
education, his person, his understanding, his manners, his air, his
fortune--reversions too taken in to augment the surfeiting catalogue!
What a fond string of lovesick praises is here! And yet you would live
single--Yes, I warrant!--when so many imaginary perfections dance before
your dazzled eye!--But no more--I only desire, that you will not, while
you seem to have such an opinion of your wit, think every one else a
fool; and that you can at pleasure, by your whining flourishes, make us
all dance after your lead.

Write as often as you will, this shall be the last answer or notice you
shall have upon this subject from

ARABELLA HARLOWE.


***


I had in readiness a letter for each of my uncles; and meeting in the
garden a servant of my uncle Harlowe, I gave him to deliver according to
their respective directions. If I am to form a judgment by the answers I
have received from my brother and sister, as above, I must not, I
doubt, expect any good from those letters. But when I have tried every
expedient, I shall have the less to blame myself for, if any thing
unhappy should fall out. I will send you copies of both, when I shall
see what notice they will be thought worthy of, if of any.




LETTER XXX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY NIGHT, MARCH 12.


This man, this Lovelace, gives me great uneasiness. He is extremely bold
and rash. He was this afternoon at our church--in hopes to see me, I
suppose: and yet, if he had such hopes, his usual intelligence must have
failed him.

Shorey was at church; and a principal part of her observation was upon
his haughty and proud behaviour when he turned round in the pew where he
sat to our family-pew. My father and both my uncles were there; so were
my mother and sister. My brother happily was not.--They all came home in
disorder. Nor did the congregation mind any body but him; it being his
first appearance there since the unhappy rencounter.

What did the man come for, if he intended to look challenge and
defiance, as Shorey says he did, and as others, it seems, thought he
did, as well as she? Did he come for my sake; and, by behaving in such
a manner to those present of my family, imagine he was doing me either
service or pleasure?--He knows how they hate him: nor will he take
pains, would pains do, to obviate their hatred.

You and I, my dear, have often taken notice of his pride; and you have
rallied him upon it; and instead of exculpating himself, he has owned
it: and by owning it he has thought he has done enough.

For my own part, I thought pride in his case an improper subject for
raillery.--People of birth and fortune to be proud, is so needless,
so mean a vice!--If they deserve respect, they will have it, without
requiring it. In other words, for persons to endeavour to gain respect
by a haughty behaviour, is to give a proof that they mistrust their own
merit: To make confession that they know that their actions will not
attract it.--Distinction or quality may be prided in by those to whom
distinction or quality is a new thing. And then the reflection and
contempt which such bring upon themselves by it, is a counter-balance.

Such added advantages, too, as this man has in his person and mien:
learned also, as they say he is: Such a man to be haughty, to be
imperious!--The lines of his own face at the same time condemning
him--how wholly inexcusable!--Proud of what? Not of doing well: the only
justifiable pride.--Proud of exterior advantages!--Must not one be led
by such a stop-short pride, as I may call it, in him or her who has it,
to mistrust the interior? Some people may indeed be afraid, that if
they did not assume, they would be trampled upon. A very narrow fear,
however, since they trample upon themselves, who can fear this. But this
man must be secure that humility would be an ornament to him.

He has talents indeed: but those talents and his personal advantages
have been snares to him. It is plain they have. And this shews, that,
weighed in an equal balance, he would be found greatly wanting.

Had my friends confided as they did at first, in that discretion which
they do not accuse me of being defective in, I dare say I should have
found him out: and then should have been as resolute to dismiss him, as
I was to dismiss others, and as I am never to have Mr. Solmes. O that
they did but know my heart!--It shall sooner burst, than voluntarily,
uncompelled, undriven, dictate a measure that shall cast a slur either
upon them, or upon my sex.

Excuse me, my dear friend, for these grave soliloquies, as I may call
them. How have I run from reflection to reflection!--But the occasion is
recent--They are all in commotion below upon it.

Shorey says, that Mr. Lovelace watched my mother's eye, and bowed to
her: and she returned the compliment. He always admired my mother. She
would not, I believe, have hated him, had she not been bid to hate him:
and had it not been for the rencounter between him and her only son.

Dr. Lewen was at church; and observing, as every one else did, the
disorder into which Mr. Lovelace's appearance* had put all our family,
was so good as to engage him in conversation, when the service was over,
till they were all gone to their coaches.


     * See Letter XXXI, for Mr. Lovelace's account of his
     behaviour and intentions in his appearance at church.


My uncles had my letters in the morning. They, as well as my father,
are more and more incensed against me, it seems. Their answers, if
they vouchsafe to answer me, will demonstrate, I doubt not, the
unseasonableness of this rash man's presence at our church.

They are angry also, as I understand, with my mother, for returning
his compliment. What an enemy is hatred, even to the common forms of
civility! which, however, more distinguish the payer of a compliment,
than the receiver. But they all see, they say, that there is but one way
to put an end to his insults. So I shall suffer: And in what will the
rash man have benefited himself, or mended his prospects?

I am extremely apprehensive that this worse than ghost-like appearance
of his, bodes some still bolder step. If he come hither (and very
desirous he is of my leave to come) I am afraid there will be murder. To
avoid that, if there were no other way, I would most willingly be buried
alive.

They are all in consultation--upon my letters, I suppose--so they were
in the morning; which occasioned my uncles to be at our church. I will
send you the copies of those letters, as I promised in my last, when
I see whether I can give you their answers with them. This letter is
all--I cannot tell what--the effect of apprehension and displeasure
at the man who has occasioned my apprehensions. Six lines would have
contained all that is in it to the purpose of my story.

CL. H.




LETTER XXXI

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. MONDAY, MARCH 13.


In vain dost thou* and thy compeers press me to go to town, while I am
in such an uncertainty as I am in at present with this proud beauty.
All the ground I have hitherto gained with her is entirely owing to her
concern for the safety of people whom I have reason to hate.

     *These gentlemen affected what they called the Roman style
     (to wit, the thee and the thou) in their letters: and it was
     an agreed rule with them, to take in good part whatever
     freedoms they treated each other with, if the passages were
     written in that style.

Write then, thou biddest me, if I will not come. That, indeed, I can do;
and as well without a subject, as with one. And what follows shall be a
proof of it.

The lady's malevolent brother has now, as I told thee at M. Hall,
introduced another man; the most unpromising in his person and
qualities, the most formidable in his offers, that has yet appeared.

This man has by his proposals captivated every soul of the
Harlowes--Soul! did I say--There is not a soul among them but my
charmer's: and she, withstanding them all, is actually confined, and
otherwise maltreated by a father the most gloomy and positive; at the
instigation of a brother the most arrogant and selfish. But thou knowest
their characters; and I will not therefore sully my paper with them.

But is it not a confounded thing to be in love with one, who is the
daughter, the sister, the niece, of a family, I must eternally despise?
And, the devil of it, that love increasing with her--what shall I call
it?--'Tis not scorn:--'Tis not pride:--'Tis not the insolence of an
adored beauty:--But 'tis to virtue, it seems, that my difficulties are
owin; and I pay for not being a sly sinner, an hypocrite; for being
regardless of my reputation; for permittin slander to open its mouth
against me. But is it necessary for such a one as I, who have been used
to carry all before me, upon my own terms--I, who never inspired a fear,
that had not a discernibly-predominant mixture of love in it, to be a
hypocrite?--Well says the poet:

 He who seems virtuous does but act a part;
 And shews not his own nature, but his art.

Well, but it seems I must practise for this art, if it would succeed
with this truly-admirable creature; but why practise for it?--Cannot
I indeed reform?--I have but one vice;--Have I, Jack?--Thou knowest my
heart, if any man living does. As far as I know it myself, thou knowest
it. But 'tis a cursed deceiver; for it has many a time imposed upon its
master--Master, did I say? That I am not now; nor have I been from the
moment I beheld this angel of a woman. Prepared indeed as I was by her
character before I saw her: For what a mind must that be, which,
though not virtuous itself, admires not virtue in another?--My visit
to Arabella, owing to a mistake of the sister, into which, as thou hast
heard me say, I was led by the blundering uncle; who was to introduce
me (but lately come from abroad) to the divinity, as I thought; but,
instead of her, carried me to a mere mortal. And much difficulty had I,
so fond and forward my lady! to get off without forfeiting all with a
family I intended should give me a goddess.

I have boasted that I was once in love before:--and indeed I thought
I was. It was in my early manhood--with that quality jilt, whose
infidelity I have vowed to revenge upon as many of the sex as shall come
into my power. I believe, in different climes, I have already
sacrificed an hecatomb to my Nemesis, in pursuance of this vow. But upon
recollecting what I was then, and comparing it with what I find myself
now, I cannot say that I was ever in love before.

What was it then, dost thou ask me, since the disappointment had such
effects upon me, when I found myself jilted, that I was hardly kept in
my senses?--Why, I'll grant thee what, as near as I can remember; for
it was a great while ago:--It was--Egad, Jack, I can hardly tell what
it was--but a vehement aspiration after a novelty, I think. Those
confounded poets, with their terrenely-celestial descriptions, did as
much with me as the lady: they fired my imagination, and set me upon
a desire to become a goddess-maker. I must needs try my new-fledged
pinions in sonnet, elogy, and madrigal. I must have a Cynthia, a Stella,
a Sacharissa, as well as the best of them: darts and flames, and the
devil knows what, must I give to my cupid. I must create beauty, and
place it where nobody else could find it: and many a time have I been at
a loss for a subject, when my new-created goddess has been kinder than
it was proper for my plaintive sonnet that she should be.

Then I found I had a vanity of another sort in my passion: I found
myself well received among the women in general; and I thought it a
pretty lady-like tyranny [I was then very young, and very vain!] to
single out some one of the sex, to make half a score jealous. And I can
tell thee, it had its effect: for many an eye have I made to sparkle
with rival indignation: many a cheek glow; and even many a fan have I
caused to be snapped at a sister-beauty; accompanied with a reflection
perhaps at being seen alone with a wild young fellow who could not be in
private with both at once.

In short, Jack, it was more pride than love, as I now find it, that put
me upon making such a confounded rout about losing that noble varletess.
I thought she loved me at least as well as I believed I loved her:
nay, I had the vanity to suppose she could not help it. My friends were
pleased with my choice. They wanted me to be shackled: for early did
they doubt my morals, as to the sex. They saw, that the dancing, the
singing, the musical ladies were all fond of my company: For who [I am
in a humour to be vain, I think!]--for who danced, who sung, who touched
the string, whatever the instrument, with a better grace than thy
friend?

I have no notion of playing the hypocrite so egregiously, as to pretend
to be blind to qualifications which every one sees and acknowledges.
Such praise-begetting hypocrisy! Such affectedly disclaimed attributes!
Such contemptible praise-traps!--But yet, shall my vanity extend only
to personals, such as the gracefulness of dress, my debonnaire, and my
assurance?--Self-taught, self-acquired, these!--For my parts, I value
not myself upon them. Thou wilt say, I have no cause.--Perhaps not. But
if I had any thing valuable as to intellectuals, those are not my own;
and to be proud of what a man is answerable for the abuse of, and has
no merit in the right use of, is to strut, like the jay, in borrowed
plumage.

But to return to my fair jilt. I could not bear, that a woman, who was
the first that had bound me in silken fetters [they were not iron ones,
like those I now wear] should prefer a coronet to me: and when the bird
was flown, I set more value upon it, that when I had it safe in my cage,
and could visit in when I pleased.

But now am I indeed in love. I can think of nothing, of nobody, but
the divine Clarissa Harlowe--Harlowe!--How that hated word sticks in my
throat--But I shall give her for it the name of Love.*


* Lovelace.


 CLARISSA! O there's music in the name,
 That, soft'ning me to infant tenderness,
 Makes my heart spring like the first leaps of life!

But couldst thou have believed that I, who think it possible for me
to favour as much as I can be favoured; that I, who for this charming
creature think of foregoing the life of honour for the life of shackles;
could adopt these over-tender lines of Otway?

I checked myself, and leaving the first three lines of the following of
Dryden to the family of whiners, find the workings of the passion in my
stormy soul better expressed by the three last:

 Love various minds does variously inspire:
 He stirs in gentle natures gentle fires;
 Like that of incense on the alter laid.

 But raging flames tempestuous souls invade:
 A fire which ev'ry windy passion blows;
 With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.

And with REVENGE it shall glow!--For, dost thou think, that if it were
not from the hope, that this stupid family are all combined to do my
work for me, I would bear their insults?--Is it possible to imagine,
that I would be braved as I am braved, threatened as I am threatened, by
those who are afraid to see me; and by this brutal brother, too, to
whom I gave a life; [a life, indeed, not worth my taking!] had I not
a greater pride in knowing that by means of his very spy upon me, I am
playing him off as I please; cooling or inflaming his violent passions
as may best suit my purposes; permitting so much to be revealed of my
life and actions, and intentions, as may give him such a confidence in
his double-faced agent, as shall enable me to dance his employer upon my
own wires?

This it is that makes my pride mount above my resentment. By this
engine, whose springs I am continually oiling, I play them all off.
The busy old tarpaulin uncle I make but my ambassador to Queen Anabella
Howe, to engage her (for example-sake to her princessly daughter) to
join in their cause, and to assert an authority they are resolved, right
or wrong, (or I could do nothing,) to maintain.

And what my motive, dost thou ask? No less than this, That my beloved
shall find no protection out of my family; for, if I know hers, fly she
must, or have the man she hates. This, therefore, if I take my measures
right, and my familiar fail me not, will secure her mine, in spite of
them all; in spite of her own inflexible heart: mine, without condition;
without reformation-promises; without the necessity of a siege of years,
perhaps; and to be even then, after wearing the guise of merit-doubting
hypocrisy, at an uncertainty, upon a probation unapproved of. Then shall
I have all the rascals and rascalesses of the family come creeping to
me: I prescribing to them; and bringing that sordidly imperious brother
to kneel at the footstool of my throne.

All my fear arises from the little hold I have in the heart of this
charming frost-piece: such a constant glow upon her lovely features:
eyes so sparkling: limbs so divinely turned: health so florid: youth so
blooming: air so animated--to have an heart so impenetrable: and I, the
hitherto successful Lovelace, the addresser--How can it be? Yet there
are people, and I have talked with some of them, who remember that
she was born. Her nurse Norton boasts of her maternal offices in her
earliest infancy; and in her education gradatim. So there is full proof,
that she came not from above all at once an angel! How then can she be
so impenetrable?

But here's her mistake; nor will she be cured of it--She takes the man
she calls her father [her mother had been faultless, had she not been
her father's wife]; she takes the men she calls her uncles; the fellow
she calls her brother; and the poor contemptible she calls her sister;
to be her father, to be her uncles, her brother, her sister; and that,
as such, she owes to some of them reverence, to others respect, let them
treat her ever so cruelly!--Sordid ties!--Mere cradle prejudices!--For
had they not been imposed upon her by Nature, when she was in a perverse
humour, or could she have chosen her relations, would any of these have
been among them?

How my heart rises at her preference of them to me, when she is
convinced of their injustice to me! Convinced, that the alliance would
do honour to them all--herself excepted; to whom every one owes honour;
and from whom the most princely family might receive it. But how much
more will my heart rise with indignation against her, if I find she
hesitates but one moment (however persecuted) about preferring me to the
man she avowedly hates! But she cannot surely be so mean as to purchase
her peace with them at so dear a rate. She cannot give a sanction to
projects formed in malice, and founded in a selfishness (and that at her
own expense) which she has spirit enough to despise in others; and ought
to disavow, that we may not think her a Harlowe.

By this incoherent ramble thou wilt gather, that I am not likely to come
up in haste; since I must endeavour first to obtain some assurance from
the beloved of my soul, that I shall not be sacrificed to such a wretch
as Solmes! Woe be to the fair one, if ever she be driven into my
power (for I despair of a voluntary impulse in my favour) and I find a
difficulty in obtaining this security.

That her indifference to me is not owing to the superior liking she has
for any other, is what rivets my chains. But take care, fair one; take
care, O thou most exalted of female minds, and loveliest of persons, how
thou debasest thyself by encouraging such a competition as thy sordid
relations have set on foot in mere malice to me!--Thou wilt say I rave.
And so I do:

 Perdition catch my soul, but I do love her.

Else, could I hear the perpetual revilings of her implacable
family?--Else, could I basely creep about--not her proud father's
house--but his paddock and garden walls?--Yet (a quarter of a mile
distance between us) not hoping to behold the least glimpse of her
shadow?--Else, should I think myself repaid, amply repaid, if the
fourth, fifth, or sixth midnight stroll, through unfrequented paths, and
over briery enclosures, affords me a few cold lines; the even expected
purport only to let me know, that she values the most worthless person
of her very worthless family, more than she values me; and that she
would not write at all, but to induce me to bear insults, which unman
me to bear?--My lodging in the intermediate way at a wretched alehouse;
disguised like an inmate of it: accommodations equally vile, as those
I met with in my Westphalian journey. 'Tis well, that the necessity for
all this arise not from scorn and tyranny! but is first imposed upon
herself!

But was ever hero in romance (fighting with giants and dragons excepted)
called upon to harder trials?--Fortune and family, and reversionary
grandeur on my side! Such a wretched fellow my competitor!--Must I not
be deplorably in love, that can go through these difficulties, encounter
these contempts?--By my soul, I am half ashamed of myself: I, who am
perjured too, by priority of obligation, if I am faithful to any woman
in the world?

And yet, why say I, I am half ashamed?--Is it not a glory to love her
whom every one who sees her either loves, or reveres, or both? Dryden
says,

 The cause of love can never be assign'd:
 'Tis in no face;--but in the lover's mind.
--And Cowley thus addresses beauty as a mere imaginary:

 Beauty! thou wild fantastic ape,
 Who dost in ev'ry country change thy shape:
 Here black; there brown; here tawny; and there white!
 Thou flatt'rer, who comply'st with ev'ry sight!
 Who hast no certain what, nor where.

But both these, had they been her contemporaries, and known her, would
have confessed themselves mistaken: and, taking together person, mind,
and behaviour, would have acknowledged the justice of the universal
voice in her favour.

 --Full many a lady
 I've ey'd with best regard; and many a time
 Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
 Brought my too-diligent ear.  For sev'ral virtues
 Have I liked several women.  Never any
 With so full a soul, but some defect in her
 Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd,
 And put it to the foil.  But SHE!--O SHE!
 So perfect and so peerless is created,
 Of ev'ry creature's best.

 SHAKESP.

Thou art curious to know, if I have not started a new game? If it
be possible for so universal a lover to be confined so long to one
object?--Thou knowest nothing of this charming creature, that thou canst
put such questions to me; or thinkest thou knowest me better than
thou dost. All that's excellent in her sex is this lady!--Until by
MATRIMONIAL or EQUAL intimacies, I have found her less than angel, it is
impossible to think of any other. Then there are so many stimulatives
to such a spirit as mine in this affair, besides love: such a field of
stratagem and contrivance, which thou knowest to be the delight of my
heart. Then the rewarding end of all!--To carry off such a girl as this,
in spite of all her watchful and implacable friends; and in spite of a
prudence and reserve that I never met with in any of the sex;--what a
triumph!--What a triumph over the whole sex!--And then such a revenge to
gratify; which is only at present politically reined in, eventually to
break forth with greater fury--Is it possible, thinkest thou, that there
can be room for a thought that is not of her, and devoted to her?


***


By the devices I have this moment received, I have reason to think, that
I shall have occasion for thee here. Hold thyself in readiness to come
down upon the first summons.

Let Belton, and Mowbray, and Tourville, likewise prepare themselves. I
have a great mind to contrive a method to send James Harlowe to travel
for improvement. Never was there a booby 'squire that more wanted it.
Contrive it, did I say? I have already contrived it; could I but put
it in execution without being suspected to have a hand in it. This I am
resolved upon; if I have not his sister, I will have him.

But be this as it may, there is a present likelihood of room for
glorious mischief. A confederacy had been for some time formed against
me; but the uncles and the nephew are now to be double-servanted
[single-servanted they were before]; and those servants are to be
double armed when they attend their masters abroad. This indicates their
resolute enmity to me, and as resolute favour to Solmes.

The reinforced orders for this hostile apparatus are owing it seems to a
visit I made yesterday to their church.--A good place I thought to begin
a reconciliation in; supposing the heads of the family to be christians,
and that they meant something by their prayers. My hopes were to have
an invitation (or, at least, to gain a pretence) to accompany home the
gloomy sire; and so get an opportunity to see my goddess: for I believed
they durst not but be civil to me, at least. But they were filled with
terror it seems at my entrance; a terror they could not get over. I saw
it indeed in their countenances; and that they all expected something
extraordinary to follow.--And so it should have done, had I been more
sure than I am of their daughter's favour. Yet not a hair of any of
their stupid heads do I intend to hurt.

You shall all have your directions in writing, if there be occasion. But
after all, I dare say there will be no need but to shew your faces in my
company.

Such faces never could four men shew--Mowbray's so fierce and so
fighting: Belton's so pert and so pimply: Tourville's so fair and
so foppish: thine so rough and so resolute: and I your leader!--What
hearts, although meditating hostility, must those be which we shall not
appall?--Each man occasionally attended by a servant or two, long ago
chosen for qualities resembling those of his master.

Thus, Jack, as thou desirest, have I written.--Written upon something;
upon nothing; upon REVENGE, which I love; upon LOVE, which I hate,
heartily hate, because 'tis my master: and upon the devil knows what
besides: for looking back, I am amazed at the length of it. Thou mayest
read it: I would not for a king's ransom. But so as I do but write, thou
sayest thou wilt be pleased.

Be pleased then. I command thee to be pleased: if not for the writer's
or written sake, for thy word's sake. And so in the royal style (for am
I not likely to be thy king and thy emperor in the great affair before
us?) I bid thee very heartily

Farewell.




LETTER XXXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 14.


I now send you copies of my letters to my uncles: with their answers. Be
pleased to return the latter by the first deposit. I leave them for you
to make remarks upon. I shall make none.


TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. SAT. MARCH 11.

Allow me, my honoured second Papa, as in my happy days you taught me
to call you, to implore your interest with my Papa, to engage him to
dispense with a command, which, if insisted upon, will deprive me of my
free-will, and make me miserable for my whole life.

For my whole life! let me repeat: Is that a small point, my dear Uncle,
to give up? Am not I to live with the man? Is any body else? Shall I not
therefore be allowed to judge for myself, whether I can, or cannot, live
happily with him?

Should it be ever so unhappily, will it be prudence to complain or
appeal? If it were, to whom could I appeal with effect against a
husband? And would not the invincible and avowed dislike I have for him
at setting out, seem to justify any ill usage from him, in that state,
were I to be ever so observant of him? And if I were to be at all
observant of him, it must be from fear, not love.

Once more, let me repeat, That this is not a small point to give up:
and that it is for life. Why, I pray you, good Sir, should I be made
miserable for life? Why should I be deprived of all comfort, but that
which the hope that it would be a very short one, would afford me?

Marriage is a very solemn engagement, enough to make a young creature's
heart ache, with the best prospects, when she thinks seriously of
it!--To be given up to a strange man; to be engrafted into a strange
family; to give up her very name, as a mark of her becoming his absolute
and dependent property; to be obliged to prefer this strange man to
father, mother--to every body:--and his humours to all her own--or to
contend, perhaps, in breach of avowed duty, for every innocent
instance of free-will. To go no where; to make acquaintance; to give up
acquaintance; to renounce even the strictest friendships, perhaps;
all at his pleasure, whether she thinks it reasonable to do so or not.
Surely, Sir, a young creature ought not to be obliged to make all these
sacrifices but for such a man as she can love. If she be, how sad must
be the case! How miserable the life, if it can be called life!

I wish I could obey you all. What a pleasure would it be to me, if I
could!--Marry first, and love will come after, was said by one of my
dearest friends! But this is a shocking assertion. A thousand thing may
happen to make that state but barely tolerable, where it is entered into
with mutual affections: What must it then be, where the husband can have
no confidence in the love of his wife: but has reason rather to question
it, from the preference he himself believes she would have given to
somebody else, had she had her own option? What doubts, what jealousies,
what want of tenderness, what unfavourable prepossessions, will there
be, in a matrimony thus circumstanced! How will every look, every
action, even the most innocent, be liable to misconstruction!--While,
on the other hand, an indifference, a carelessness to oblige, may take
place; and fear only can constrain even an appearance of what ought to
be the effect of undisguised love!

Think seriously of these things, dear, good Sir, and represent them to
my father in that strong light which the subject will bear; but in which
my sex, and my tender years and inexperience, will not permit me to
paint it; and use your powerful interest, that your poor niece may not
be consigned to a misery so durable.

I offered to engage not to marry at all, if that condition may be
accepted. What a disgrace is it to me to be thus sequestered from
company, thus banished my papa's and mamma's presence; thus slighted and
deserted by you, Sir, and my other kind uncle! And to be hindered from
attending at that public worship, which, were I out of the way of my
duty, would be most likely to reduce me into the right path again!--Is
this the way, Sir; can this be thought to be the way to be taken with
a free and open spirit? May not this strange method rather harden than
convince? I cannot bear to live in disgrace thus. The very servants so
lately permitted to be under my own direction, hardly daring to speak to
me; my own servant discarded with high marks of undeserved suspicion and
displeasure, and my sister's maid set over me.

The matter may be too far pushed.--Indeed it may.--And then, perhaps,
every one will be sorry for their parts in it.

May I be permitted to mention an expedient?--'If I am to be
watched, banished, and confined; suppose, Sir, it were to be at your
house?'--Then the neighbouring gentry will the less wonder, that the
person of whom they used to think so favourably, appear not at church
here; and that she received not their visits.

I hope there can be no objection to this. You used to love to have
me with you, Sir, when all went happily with me: And will you not now
permit me, in my troubles, the favour of your house, till all this
displeasure is overblown?--Upon my word, Sir, I will not stir out of
doors, if you require the contrary of me: nor will I see any body, but
whom you will allow me to see; provided Mr. Solmes be not brought to
persecute me there.

Procure, then, this favour for me; if you cannot procure the still
greater, that of a happy reconciliation (which nevertheless I presume to
hope for, if you will be so good as to plead for me); and you will then
add to those favours and to that indulgence, which have bound me, and
will for ever bind me to be

Your dutiful and obliged niece, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


THE ANSWER


SUNDAY NIGHT.

MY DEAR NIECE,

It grieves me to be forced to deny you any thing you ask. Yet it must be
so; for unless you can bring your mind to oblige us in this one point,
in which our promises and honour were engaged before we believed there
could be so sturdy an opposition, you must never expect to be what you
have been to us all.

In short, Niece, we are in an embattled phalanx. Your reading makes you
a stranger to nothing but what you should be most acquainted with. So
you will see by that expression, that we are not to be pierced by your
persuasions, and invincible persistence. We have agreed all to be
moved, or none; and not to comply without one another. So you know your
destiny; and have nothing to do but to yield to it.

Let me tell you, the virtue of obedience lies not in obliging when you
can be obliged again. But give up an inclination, and there is some
merit in that.

As to your expedient; you shall not come to my house, Miss Clary; though
this is a prayer I little thought I ever should have denied you: for
were you to keep your word as to seeing nobody but whom we please, yet
can you write to somebody else, and receive letters from him. This we
too well know you can, and have done--more is the shame and the pity!

You offer to live single, Miss--we wished you married: but because you
may not have the man your heart is set upon, why, truly, you will have
nobody we shall recommend: and as we know, that somehow or other you
correspond with him, or at least did as long as you could; and as he
defies us all, and would not dare to do so, if he were not sure of you
in spite of us all, (which is not a little vexatious to us, you must
think,) we are resolved to frustrate him, and triumph over him, rather
than that he should triumph over us: that's one word for all. So expect
not any advocateship from me: I will not plead for you; and that's
enough. From

Your displeased uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.

P.S. For the rest I refer to my brother Antony.


***


TO ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQ. SATURDAY, MARCH 11.

HONOURED SIR,

As you have thought fit to favour Mr. Solmes with your particular
recommendation, and was very earnest in his behalf, ranking him (as
you told me, upon introducing him to me) among your select friends; and
expecting my regards to him accordingly; I beg your patience, while
I offer a few things, out of many that I could offer, to your serious
consideration, on occasion of his address to me, if I am to use that
word.

I am charged with prepossession in another person's favour. You will be
pleased, Sir, to remember, that till my brother returned from Scotland,
that other person was not absolutely discouraged, nor was I forbid to
receive his visits. I believe it will not be pretended, that in birth,
education, or personal endowments, a comparison can be made between the
two. And only let me ask you, Sir, if the one would have been thought of
for me, had he not made such offers, as, upon my word, I think, I ought
not in justice to accept of, nor he to propose: offers, which if he had
not made, I dare say, my papa would not have required them of him.

But the one, it seems, has many faults:--Is the other faultless?--The
principal thing objected to Mr. Lovelace (and a very inexcusable one) is
that he is immoral in his loves--Is not the other in his hatreds?--Nay,
as I may say, in his loves too (the object only differing) if the love
of money be the root of all evil.

But, Sir, if I am prepossessed, what has Mr. Solmes to hope for?--Why
should he persevere? What must I think of the man who would wish me to
be his wife against my inclination?--And is it not a very harsh thing
for my friends to desire to see me married to one I cannot love, when
they will not be persuaded but that there is one whom I do love?

Treated as I am, now is the time for me to speak out or never.--Let
me review what it is Mr. Solmes depends upon on this occasion. Does he
believe, that the disgrace which I supper on his account, will give
him a merit with me? Does he think to win my esteem, through my uncles'
sternness to me; by my brother's contemptuous usage; by my sister's
unkindness; by being denied to visit, or be visited; and to correspond
with my chosen friend, although a person of unexceptionable honour and
prudence, and of my own sex; my servant to be torn from me, and another
servant set over me; to be confined, like a prisoner, to narrow and
disgraceful limits, in order avowedly to mortify me, and to break my
spirit; to be turned out of that family-management which I loved, and
had the greater pleasure in it, because it was an ease, as I thought, to
my mamma, and what my sister chose not; and yet, though time hangs heavy
upon my hands, to be so put out of my course, that I have as little
inclination as liberty to pursue any of my choice delights?--Are these
steps necessary to reduce me to a level so low, as to make me a fit wife
for this man?--Yet these are all he can have to trust to. And if
his reliance is on these measures, I would have him to know, that
he mistakes meekness and gentleness of disposition for servility and
baseness of heart.

I beseech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent of his mind and my
mind be considered: What are his qualities, by which he would hope to
win my esteem?--Dear, dear Sir, if I am to be compelled, let it be in
favour of a man that can read and write--that can teach me something:
For what a husband must that man make, who can do nothing but command;
and needs himself the instruction he should be qualified to give?

I may be conceited, Sir; I may be vain of my little reading; of my
writing; as of late I have more than once been told I am. But, Sir, the
more unequal the proposed match, if so: the better opinion I have of
myself, the worse I must have of him; and the more unfit are we for each
other.

Indeed, Sir, I must say, I thought my friends had put a higher value
upon me. My brother pretended once, that it was owing to such value,
that Mr. Lovelace's address was prohibited.--Can this be; and such a man
as Mr. Solmes be intended for me?

As to his proposed settlements, I hope I shall not incur your great
displeasure, if I say, what all who know me have reason to think (and
some have upbraided me for), that I despise those motives. Dear, dear
Sir, what are settlements to one who has as much of her own as she
wishes for?--Who has more in her own power, as a single person, than
it is probable she would be permitted to have at her disposal, as a
wife?--Whose expenses and ambition are moderate; and who, if she had
superfluities, would rather dispense them to the necessitous, than lay
them by her useless? If then such narrow motives have so little weight
with me for my own benefit, shall the remote and uncertain view of
family-aggrandizements, and that in the person of my brother and his
descendents, be thought sufficient to influence me?

Has the behaviour of that brother to me of late, or his consideration
for the family (which had so little weight with him, that he could
choose to hazard a life so justly precious as an only son's, rather than
not ratify passions which he is above attempting to subdue, and, give me
leave to say, has been too much indulged in, either with regard to his
own good, or the peace of any body related to him;) Has his behaviour, I
say, deserved of me in particular, that I should make a sacrifice of my
temporal (and, who knows? of my eternal) happiness, to promote a plan
formed upon chimerical, at least upon unlikely, contingencies; as I will
undertake to demonstrate, if I may be permitted to examine it?

I am afraid you will condemn my warmth: But does not the occasion
require it? To the want of a greater degree of earnestness in my
opposition, it seems, it is owing, that such advances have been made,
as have been made. Then, dear Sir, allow something, I beseech you, for a
spirit raised and embittered by disgraces, which (knowing my own heart)
I am confident to say, are unmerited.

But why have I said so much, in answer to the supposed charge of
prepossession, when I have declared to my mamma, as now, Sir, I do
to you, that if it be not insisted upon that I shall marry any other
person, particularly this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into any engagements
never to have the other, nor any man else, without their consents; that
is to say, without the consents of my father and my mother, and of you
my uncle, and my elder uncle, and my cousin Morden, as he is one of the
trustees for my grandfather's bounty to me?--As to my brother indeed, I
cannot say, that his treatment of me has been of late so brotherly,
as to entitle him to more than civility from me: and for this, give me
leave to add, he would be very much my debtor.

If I have not been explicit enough in declaring my dislike to Mr. Solmes
(that the prepossession which is charged upon me may not be supposed to
influence me against him) I do absolutely declare, That were there no
such man as Mr. Lovelace in the world, I would not have Mr. Solmes.
It is necessary, in some one of my letters to my dear friends, that I
should write so clearly as to put this matter out of all doubt: and to
whom can I better address myself with an explicitness that can admit
of no mistake, than to that uncle who professes the highest regard for
plain-dealing and sincerity?

Let me, for these reasons, be still more particular in some of my
exceptions to him.

Mr. Solmes appears to me (to all the world, indeed) to have a very
narrow mind, and no great capacity: he is coarse and indelicate; as
rough in his manners as in his person: he is not only narrow, but
covetous: being possessed of great wealth, he enjoys it not; nor has the
spirit to communicate to a distress of any kind. Does not his own sister
live unhappily, for want of a little of his superfluities? And suffers
not he his aged uncle, the brother of his own mother, to owe to
the generosity of strangers the poor subsistence he picks up from
half-a-dozen families?--You know, Sir, my open, free, communicative
temper: how unhappy must I be, circumscribed in his narrow, selfish
circle! out of which being with-held by this diabolical parsimony, he
dare no more stir, than a conjurer out of his; nor would let me.

Such a man, as this, love!--Yes, perhaps he may, my grandfather's
estate; which he has told several persons (and could not resist hinting
the same thing tome, with that sort of pleasure which a low mind takes,
when it intimates its own interest as a sufficient motive for it to
expect another's favour) lies so extremely convenient for him, that it
would double the value of a considerable part of his own. That estate,
and an alliance which would do credit to his obscurity and narrowness,
they make him think he can love, and induce him to believe he does: but
at most, he is but a second-place love. Riches were, are, and always
will be, his predominant passion. His were left him by a miser, on this
very account: and I must be obliged to forego all the choice delights
of my life, and be as mean as he, or else be quite unhappy. Pardon, Sir,
this severity of expression--one is apt to say more than one would of
a person one dislikes, when more is said in his favour than he can
possibly deserve; and when he is urged to my acceptance with so much
vehemence, that there is no choice left me.

Whether these things be perfectly so, or not, while I think they are,
it is impossible I should ever look upon Mr. Solmes in the light he is
offered to me. Nay, were he to be proved ten times better than I have
represented him, and sincerely think him; yet would he be still ten
times more disagreeable to me than any other man I know in the world.
Let me therefore beseech you, Sir, to become an advocate for your niece,
that she may not be made a victim to a man so highly disgustful to her.

You and my other uncle can do a great deal for me, if you please, with
my papa. Be persuaded, Sir, that I am not governed by obstinacy in this
case; but by aversion; an aversion I cannot overcome: for, if I have but
endeavoured to reason with myself, (out of regard to the duty I owe
to my father's will,) my heart has recoiled, and I have been averse to
myself, for offering but to argue with myself, in behalf of a man who,
in the light he appears to me, has no one merit; and who, knowing this
aversion, could not persevere as he does, if he had the spirit of a man.

If, Sir, you can think of the contents of this letter reasonable, I
beseech you to support them with your interest. If not--I shall be most
unhappy!--Nevertheless, it is but just in me so to write, as that Mr.
Solmes may know what he has to trust to.

Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious letter; and suffer it to have weight
with you; and you will for ever oblige

Your dutiful and affectionate niece,

CL. HARLOWE.


***


MR. ANTONY HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE

NIECE CLARY,

You had better not write to us, or to any of us. To me, particularly,
you had better never to have set pen to paper, on the subject whereon
you have written. He that is first in his own cause, saith the wise man,
seemeth just: but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. And so, in
this respect, I will be your neighbour: for I will search your heart to
the bottom; that is to say, if your letter be written from your heart.
Yet do I know what a task I have undertaken, because of the knack you
are noted for at writing. But in defence of a father's authority, in
behalf of the good, and honour, and prosperity of the family one comes
of, what a hard thing it would be, if one could not beat down all the
arguments a rebel child (how loth I am to write down that word of Miss
Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her obstinacy!

In the first place, don't you declare (and that contrary to your
declarations to your mother, remember that, girl!) that you prefer the
man we all hate, and who hates us as bad!--Then what a character have
you given of a worthy man! I wonder you dare write so freely of one we
all respect--but possibly it may be for that very reason.

How you begin your letter!--Because I value Mr. Solmes as my friend, you
treat him the worse--That's the plain dunstable of the matter, Miss!--I
am not such a fool but I can see that.--And so a noted whoremonger is
to be chosen before a man who is a money-lover!--Let me tell you, Niece,
this little becomes so nice a one as you have been always reckoned. Who,
think you, does more injustice, a prodigal man or a saving man?--The one
saves his own money; the other spends other people's. But your favourite
is a sinner in grain, and upon record.

The devil's in your sex! God forgive me for saying so--the nicest of
them will prefer a vile rake and wh---- I suppose I must not repeat the
word:--the word will offend, when the vicious denominated by that word
will be chosen!--I had not been a bachelor to this time, if I had not
seen such a mass of contradictions in you all.--Such gnat-strainers and
camel-swallowers, as venerable Holy Writ has it.

What names will perverseness call things by!--A prudent man, who intends
to be just to every body, is a covetous man!--While a vile, profligate
rake is christened with the appellation of a gallant man; and a polite
man, I'll warrant you!

It is my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have so much regard for you
as he professes, but for two reasons. And what are these?--Why, out of
spite to all of us--one of them. The other, because of your independent
fortune. I wish your good grandfather had not left what he did so much
in your own power, as I may say. But little did he imagine his beloved
grand-daughter would have turned upon all her friends as she has done!

What has Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you are prepossessed! Hey-day!
Is this you, cousin Clary!--Has he then nothing to hope for from your
father's, and mother's, and our recommendations?--No, nothing at all, it
seems!--O brave!--I should think that this, with a dutiful child, as we
took you to be, was enough. Depending on this your duty, we proceeded:
and now there is no help for it: for we will not be balked: neither
shall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that.

If your estate is convenient for him, what then? Does that (pert cousin)
make it out that he does not love you? He had need to expect some good
with you, that has so little good to hope for from you; mind that. But
pray, is not this estate our estate, as we may say? Have we not all an
interest in it, and a prior right, if right were to have taken place?
And was it not more than a good old man's dotage, God rest his soul!
that gave it you before us all?--Well then, ought we not to have a
choice who shall have it in marriage with you? and would you have the
conscience to wish us to let a vile fellow, who hates us all, run away
with it?--You bid me weigh what you write: do you weigh this, Girl: and
it will appear we have more to say for ourselves than you was aware of.

As to your hard treatment, as you call it, thank yourself for that. It
may be over when you will: so I reckon nothing upon that. You was not
banished and confined till all entreaty and fair speeches were tried
with you: mind that. And Mr. Solmes can't help your obstinacy: let that
be observed too.

As to being visited, and visiting; you never was fond of either: so
that's a grievance put into the scale to make weight.--As to disgrace,
that's as bad to us as to you: so fine a young creature! So much as we
used to brag of you too!--And besides, this is all in your power, as the
rest.

But your heart recoils, when you would persuade yourself to obey your
parent--Finely described, is it not!--Too truly described, I own, as you
go on. I know that you may love him if you will. I had a good mind to
bid you hate him; then, perhaps, you would like him the better: for I
have always found a most horrid romantic perverseness in your sex.--To
do and to love what you should not, is meat, drink, and vesture, to you
all.

I am absolutely of your brother's mind, That reading and writing, though
not too much for the wits of you young girls, are too much for your
judgments.--You say, you may be conceited, Cousin; you may be vain!--And
so you are, to despise this gentleman as you do. He can read and write
as well as most gentlemen, I can tell you that. Who told you Mr. Solmes
cannot read and write? But you must have a husband who can learn
you something!--I wish you knew but your duty as well as you do your
talents--that, Niece, you have of late days to learn; and Mr. Solmes
will therefore find something to instruct you in. I will not shew him
this letter of yours, though you seem to desire it, lest it should
provoke him to be too severe a schoolmaster, when you are his'n.

But now I think of it, suppose you are the reader at your pen than
he--You will make the more useful wife to him; won't you? For who so
good an economist as you?--And you may keep all of his accounts,
and save yourselves a steward.--And, let me tell you, this is a fine
advantage in a family: for those stewards are often sad dogs, and creep
into a man's estate before he knows where he is; and not seldom is he
forced to pay them interest for his own money.

I know not why a good wife should be above these things. It is better
than lying a-bed half the day, and junketing and card-playing all the
night, and making yourselves wholly useless to every good purpose in
your own families, as is now the fashion among ye. The duce take you all
that do so, say I!--Only that, thank my stars, I am a bachelor.

Then this is a province you are admirably versed in: you grieve that
it is taken from you here, you know. So here, Miss, with Mr. Solmes you
will have something to keep account of, for the sake of you and your
children: with the other, perhaps you will have an account to keep,
too--but an account of what will go over the left shoulder; only of what
he squanders, what he borrows, and what he owes, and never will pay.
Come, come, Cousin, you know nothing of the world; a man's a man; and
you may have many partners in a handsome man, and costly ones too, who
may lavish away all you save. Mr. Solmes therefore for my money, and I
hope for yours.

But Mr. Solmes is a coarse man. He is not delicate enough for your
niceness; because I suppose he dresses not like a fop and a coxcomb, and
because he lays not himself out in complimental nonsense, the poison of
female minds. He is a man of sense, that I can tell you. No man
talks more to the purpose to us: but you fly him so, that he has no
opportunity given him, to express it to you: and a man who loves, if he
have ever so much sense, looks a fool; especially when he is despised,
and treated as you treated him the last time he was in your company.

As to his sister; she threw herself away (as you want to do) against his
full warning: for he told her what she had to trust to, if she married
where she did marry. And he was as good as his word; and so an honest
man ought: offences against warning ought to be smarted for. Take care
this be not your case: mind that.

His uncle deserves no favour from him; for he would have circumvented
Mr. Solmes, and got Sir Oliver to leave to himself the estate he had
always designed for him his nephew, and brought him up in the hope of
it. Too ready forgiveness does but encourage offences: that's your good
father's maxim: and there would not be so many headstrong daughters as
there are, if this maxim were kept in mind.--Punishments are of service
to offenders; rewards should be only to the meriting: and I think the
former are to be dealt out rigourously, in willful cases.

As to his love; he shews it but too much for your deservings, as they
have been of late; let me tell you that: and this is his misfortune; and
may in time perhaps be yours.

As to his parsimony, which you wickedly call diabolical, [a very free
word in your mouth, let me tell ye], little reason have you of all
people for this, on whom he proposes, of his own accord, to settle all
he has in the world: a proof, let him love riches as he will, that he
loves you better. But that you may be without excuse on this score,
we will tie him up to your own terms, and oblige him by the
marriage-articles to allow you a very handsome quarterly sum to do what
you please with. And this has been told you before; and I have said it
to Mrs. Howe (that good and worthy lady) before her proud daughter, that
you might hear of it again.

To contradict the charge of prepossession to Lovelace, you offer never
to have him without our consents: and what is this saying, but that you
will hope on for our consents, and to wheedle and tire us out? Then he
will always be in expectation while you are single: and we are to live
on at this rate (are we?) vexed by you, and continually watchful about
you; and as continually exposed to his insolence and threats. Remember
last Sunday, Girl!--What might have happened, had your brother and he
met?--Moreover, you cannot do with such a spirit as his, as you can with
worthy Mr. Solmes: the one you make tremble; the other will make
you quake: mind that--and you will not be able to help yourself. And
remember, that if there should be any misunderstanding between one of
them and you, we should all interpose; and with effect, no doubt: but
with the other, it would be self-do, self-have; and who would either
care or dare to put in a word for you? Nor let the supposition of
matrimonial differences frighten you: honey-moon lasts not now-a-days
above a fortnight; and Dunmow flitch, as I have been informed, was never
claimed; though some say once it was. Marriage is a queer state, Child,
whether paired by the parties or by their friends. Out of three brothers
of us, you know, there was but one had courage to marry. And why was it,
do you think? We were wise by other people's experience.

Don't despise money so much: you may come to know the value of it: that
is a piece of instruction that you are to learn; and which, according to
your own notions, Mr. Solmes will be able to teach you.

I do indeed condemn your warmth. I will not allow for disgraces you
bring upon yourself. If I thought them unmerited, I would be your
advocate. But it was always my notion, that children should not dispute
their parents' authority. When your grandfather left his estate to you,
though his three sons, and a grandson, and your elder sister, were in
being, we all acquiesced: and why? Because it was our father's doing. Do
you imitate that example: if you will not, those who set it you have the
more reason to hold you inexcusable: mind that, Cousin.

You mention your brother too scornfully: and, in your letter to him, are
very disrespectful; and so indeed you are to your sister, in the letter
you wrote to her. Your brother, Madam, is your brother; and third older
than yourself, and a man: and pray be so good as not to forget what is
due to a brother, who (next to us three brothers) is the head of the
family, and on whom the name depends--as upon your dutiful compliance
laid down for the honour of the family you are come of. And pray now let
me ask you, If the honour of that will not be an honour to you?--If you
don't think so, the more unworthy you. You shall see the plan, if you
promise not to be prejudiced against it right or wrong. If you are not
besotted to that man, I am sure you will like it. If you are, were Mr.
Solmes an angel, it would signify nothing: for the devil is love, and
love is the devil, when it gets into any of your heads. Many examples
have I seen of that.

If there were no such man as Lovelace in the world, you would not have
Mr. Solmes.--You would not, Miss!--Very pretty, truly!--We see how your
spirit is embittered indeed.--Wonder not, since it is come to your will
not's, that those who have authority over you, say, You shall have the
other. And I am one: mind that. And if it behoves YOU to speak out,
Miss, it behoves US not to speak in. What's sauce for the goose is sauce
for the gander: take that in your thought too.

I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmes has the spirit of a man, and a
gentleman. I would admonish you therefore not to provoke it. He pities
you as much as he loves you. He says, he will convince you of his love
by deeds, since he is not permitted by you to express it by words. And
all his dependence is upon your generosity hereafter. We hope he may
depend upon that: we encourage him to think he may. And this heartens
him up. So that you may lay his constancy at your parents' and your
uncles' doors; and this will be another mark of your duty, you know.

You must be sensible, that you reflect upon your parents, and all of
us, when you tell me you cannot in justice accept of the settlements
proposed to you. This reflection we should have wondered at from you
once; but now we don't.

There are many other very censurable passages in this free letter of
yours; but we must place them to the account of your embittered spirit.
I am glad you mentioned that word, because we should have been at a
loss what to have called it.--I should much rather nevertheless have had
reason to give it a better name.

I love you dearly still, Miss. I think you, though my niece, one of the
finest young gentlewomen I ever saw. But, upon my conscience, I think
you ought to obey your parents, and oblige me and my brother John:
for you know very well, that we have nothing but your good at heart:
consistently indeed with the good and honour of all of us. What must we
think of any one of it, who would not promote the good of the whole?
and who would set one part of it against another?--Which God forbid, say
I!--You see I am for the good of all. What shall I get by it, let things
go as they will? Do I want any thing of any body for my own sake?--Does
my brother John?--Well, then, Cousin Clary, what would you be at, as I
may say?

O but you can't love Mr. Solmes!--But, I say, you know not what you
can do. You encourage yourself in your dislike. You permit your heart
(little did I think it was such a froward one) to recoil. Take it to
task, Niece; drive it on as fast as it recoils, [we do so in all our
sea-fights, and land-fights too, by our sailors and soldiers, or we
should not conquer]; and we are all sure you will overcome it. And why?
Because you ought. So we think, whatever you think: and whose thoughts
are to be preferred? You may be wittier than we; but, if you were wiser,
we have lived some of us, let me tell you, to very little purpose,
thirty or forty years longer than you.

I have written as long a letter as yours. I may not write in so lively,
or so polite a style as my Niece: but I think I have all the argument
on my side: and you will vastly oblige me, if you will shew me, by your
compliance with all our desires, that you think so too. If you do not,
you must not expect an advocate, or even a friend, in me, dearly as I
love you. For then I shall be sorry to be called

Your uncle, ANT. HARLOWE.

TUESDAY, TWO IN THE MORNING. POSTSCRIPT.

You must send me no more letters: but a compliable one you may send.
But I need not have forbid you; for I am sure this, by fair argument,
is unanswerable--I know it is. I have written day and night, I may say,
ever since Sunday morning, only church-time, or the like of that: but
this is the last, I can tell you, from

ANT. H.




LETTER XXXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY, MARCH 16.


Having met with such bad success in my application to my relations, I
have taken a step that will surprise you. It is no other than writing
a letter to Mr. Solmes himself. I sent it, and have his answer. He had
certainly help in it. For I have seen a letter of his, and indifferently
worded, as poorly spelt. Yet the superscription is of his dictating,
I dare say, for he is a formal wretch. With these, I shall enclose one
from my brother to me, on occasion of mine to Mr. Solmes. I did think
that it was possible to discourage the man from proceeding; and if I
could have done that, it would have answered all my wishes. It was worth
the trial. But you'll see nothing will do. My brother has taken his
measures too securely.


TO ROGER SOLMES, ESQ. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 15.

SIR,

You will wonder to receive a letter from me; and more still at the
uncommon subject of it. But the necessity of the case will justify me,
at least in my own apprehension; and I shall therefore make no other
apology for it.

When you first came acquainted with our family, you found the writer of
this one of the happiest creatures in the world; beloved by the best
and most indulgent of parents; and rejoicing in the kind favour of two
affectionate uncles, and in the esteem of every one.

But how is this scene now changed!--You was pleased to cast a favourable
eye upon me. You addressed yourself to my friends: your proposals were
approved of by them--approved of without consulting me; as if my choice
and happiness were of the least signification. Those who had a right to
all reasonable obedience from me, insisted upon it without reserve.
I had not the felicity to think as they did; almost the first time my
sentiments differed from theirs. I besought them to indulge me in a
point so important to my future happiness: but, alas, in vain! And then
(for I thought it was but honest) I told you my mind; and even that
my affections were engaged. But, to my mortification and surprise, you
persisted, and still persist.

The consequence of all is too grievous for me to repeat: you, who have
such free access to the rest of the family, know it too well--too well
you know it, either for the credit of your own generosity, or for my
reputation. I am used, on your account, as I never before was used, and
never before was thought to deserve to be used; and this was the hard,
the impossible, condition of their returning favour, that I must prefer
a man to all others, that of all others I cannot prefer.

Thus distressed, and made unhappy, and all to your sake, and through
your cruel perseverance, I write, Sir, to demand of you the peace of
mind you have robbed me of: to demand of you the love of so many dear
friends, of which you have deprived me; and, if you have the generosity
that should distinguish a man, and a gentleman, to adjure you not to
continue an address that has been attended with such cruel effects to
the creature you profess to esteem.

If you really value me, as my friends would make me believe, and as you
have declared you do, must it not be a mean and selfish value? A value
that can have no merit with the unhappy object of it, because it is
attended with effects so grievous to her? It must be for your own sake
only, not for mine. And even in this point you must be mistaken: For,
would a prudent man wish to marry one who has not a heart to give? Who
cannot esteem him? Who therefore must prove a bad wife!--And how cruel
would it be to make a poor creature a bad wife, whose pride it would be
to make a good one!

If I am capable of judging, our tempers and inclinations are vastly
different. Any other of my sex will make you happier than I can. The
treatment I meet with, and the obstinacy, as it is called, with which I
support myself under it, ought to convince you of this; were I not able
to give so good a reason for this my supposed perverseness, as that I
cannot consent to marry a man whom I cannot value.

But if, Sir, you have not so much generosity in your value for me, as
to desist for my own sake, let me conjure you, by the regard due to
yourself, and to your own future happiness, to discontinue your suit,
and place your affections on a worthier object: for why should you make
me miserable, and yourself not happy? By this means you will do all that
is now in your power to restore to me the affection of my friends; and,
if that can be, it will leave me in as happy a state as you found me
in. You need only to say, that you see there are no HOPES, as you will
perhaps complaisantly call it, of succeeding with me [and indeed, Sir,
there cannot be a greater truth]; and that you will therefore no more
think of me, but turn your thoughts another way.

Your compliance with this request will lay me under the highest
obligation to your generosity, and make me ever

Your well-wisher, and humble servant, CLARISSA HARLOWE.



TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE These most humbly present.

DEAREST MISS,

Your letter has had a very contrary effect upon me, to what you seem to
have expected from it. It has doubly convinced me of the excellency of
your mind, and of the honour of your disposition. Call it selfish, or
what you please, I must persist in my suit; and happy shall I be, if by
patience and perseverance, and a steady and unalterable devoir, I may at
last overcome the difficulty laid in my way.

As your good parents, your uncles, and other friends, are absolutely
determined you shall never have Mr. Lovelace, if they can help it; and
as I presume no other person is in the way, I will contentedly wait the
issue of this matter. And forgive me, dearest Miss, but a person should
sooner persuade me to give up to him my estate, as an instance of my
generosity, because he could not be happy without it, than I would a
much more valuable treasure, to promote the felicity of another, and
make his way easier to circumvent myself.

Pardon me, dear Miss; but I must persevere, though I am sorry you suffer
on my account, as you are pleased to think; for I never before saw the
woman I could love: and while there is any hope, and that you remain
undisposed of to some happier man, I must and will be

Your faithful and obsequious admirer, ROGER SOLMES.

MARCH 16.


***


MR. JAMES HARLOWE, TO MISS CL. HARLOWE MARCH 16.

What a fine whim you took into your head, to write a letter to Mr.
Solmes, to persuade him to give up his pretensions to you!--Of all the
pretty romantic flights you have delighted in, this was certainly one
of the most extraordinary. But to say nothing of what fires us all with
indignation against you (your owning your prepossession in a villain's
favour, and your impertinence to me, and your sister, and your uncles;
one of which has given it you home, child), how can you lay at Mr.
Solmes's door the usage you so bitterly complain of?--You know, little
fool as you are, that it is your fondness for Lovelace that has brought
upon you all these things; and which would have happened, whether Mr.
Solmes had honoured you with his addresses or not.

As you must needs know this to be true, consider, pretty witty Miss, if
your fond, love-sick heart can let you consider, what a fine figure all
your expostulations with us, and charges upon Mr. Solmes, make!--With
what propriety do you demand of him to restore to you your former
happiness (as you call it, and merely call it; for if you thought our
favour so, you would restore it to yourself), since it is yet in your
own power to do so? Therefore, Miss Pert, none of your pathetics, except
in the right place. Depend upon it, whether you have Mr. Solmes, or not,
you shall never have your heart's delight, the vile rake Lovelace, if
our parents, if our uncles, if I, can hinder it. No! you fallen angel,
you shall not give your father and mother such a son, nor me such a
brother, in giving yourself that profligate wretch for a husband. And so
set your heart at rest, and lay aside all thoughts of him, if ever you
expect forgiveness, reconciliation, or a kind opinion, from any of your
family; but especially from him, who, at present, styles himself

Your brother, JAMES HARLOWE.

P.S. I know your knack at letter-writing. If you send me an answer
for this, I will return it unopened; for I will not argue with your
perverseness in so plain a case--Only once for all, I was willing to put
you right as to Mr. Solmes; whom I think to blame to trouble his head
about you.




LETTER XXXIV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. FRIDAY, MARCH 17.


I receive, with great pleasure, the early and cheerful assurances of
your loyalty and love. And let our principal and most trusty friends
named in my last know that I do.

I would have thee, Jack, come down, as soon as thou canst. I believe I
shall not want the others so soon. Yet they may come down to Lord M.'s.
I will be there, if not to receive them, to satisfy my lord, that there
is no new mischief in hand, which will require his second intervention.

For thyself, thou must be constantly with me: not for my security: the
family dare do nothing but bully: they bark only at a distance: but
for my entertainment: that thou mayest, from the Latin and the English
classics, keep my lovesick soul from drooping.

Thou hadst best come to me here, in thy old corporal's coat: thy servant
out of livery; and to be upon a familiar footing with me, as a distant
relation, to be provided for by thy interest above--I mean not in
Heaven, thou mayest be sure. Thou wilt find me at a little alehouse,
they call it an inn; the White Hart, most terribly wounded, (but by
the weather only,) the sign: in a sorry village, within five miles from
Harlowe-place. Every body knows Harlowe-place, for, like Versailles, it
is sprung up from a dunghill, within every elderly person's remembrance.
Every poor body, particularly, knows it: but that only for a few years
past, since a certain angel has appeared there among the sons and
daughters of men.

The people here at the Hart are poor, but honest; and have gotten it
into their heads, that I am a man of quality in disguise; and there is
no reining-in their officious respect. Here is a pretty little
smirking daughter, seventeen six days ago. I call her my Rose-bud. Her
grandmother (for there is no mother), a good neat old woman, as ever
filled a wicker chair in a chimney-corner, has besought me to be
merciful to her.

This is the right way with me. Many and many a pretty rogue had I
spared, whom I did not spare, had my power been acknowledged, and my
mercy in time implored. But the debellare superbos should be my motto,
were I to have a new one.

This simple chit (for there is a simplicity in her thou wouldst be
highly pleased with: all humble; all officious; all innocent--I love her
for her humility, her officiousness, and even for her innocence) will be
pretty amusement to thee; while I combat with the weather, and dodge and
creep about the walls and purlieus of Harlowe-place. Thou wilt see in
her mind, all that her superiors have been taught to conceal, in order
to render themselves less natural, and of consequence less pleasing.

But I charge thee, that thou do not (what I would not permit myself to
do for the world--I charge thee, that thou do not) crop my Rose-bud. She
is the only flower of fragrance, that has blown in this vicinage for ten
years past, or will for ten years to come: for I have looked backward
to the have-been's, and forward to the will-be's; having but too much
leisure upon my hands in my present waiting.

I never was so honest for so long together since my matriculation. It
behoves me so to be--some way or other, my recess at this little inn may
be found out; and it will then be thought that my Rose-bud has attracted
me. A report in my favour, from simplicities so amiable, may establish
me; for the grandmother's relation to my Rose-bud may be sworn to: and
the father is an honest, poor man; has no joy, but in his Rose-bud.--O
Jack! spare thou, therefore, (for I shall leave thee often alone with
her, spare thou) my Rose-bud!--Let the rule I never departed from, but
it cost me a long regret, be observed to my Rose-bud!--never to ruin a
poor girl, whose simplicity and innocence were all she had to trust to;
and whose fortunes were too low to save her from the rude contempts of
worse minds than her own, and from an indigence extreme: such a one will
only pine in secret; and at last, perhaps, in order to refuge herself
from slanderous tongues and virulence, be induced to tempt some
guilty stream, or seek her end in the knee-encircling garter, that
peradventure, was the first attempt of abandoned love.--No defiances
will my Rose-bud breathe; no self-dependent, thee-doubting watchfulness
(indirectly challenging thy inventive machinations to do their worst)
will she assume. Unsuspicious of her danger, the lamb's throat will
hardly shun thy knife!--O be not thou the butcher of my lambkin!

The less thou be so, for the reason I am going to give thee--The gentle
heart is touched by love: her soft bosom heaves with a passion she
has not yet found a name for. I once caught her eye following a young
carpenter, a widow neighbour's son, living [to speak in her dialect] at
the little white house over the way. A gentle youth he also seems to be,
about three years older than herself: playmates from infancy, till
his eighteenth and her fifteenth year furnished a reason for a greater
distance in shew, while their hearts gave a better for their being
nearer than ever--for I soon perceived the love reciprocal. A scrape and
a bow at first seeing his pretty mistress; turning often to salute her
following eye; and, when a winding lane was to deprive him of her sight,
his whole body turned round, his hat more reverently doffed than before.
This answered (for, unseen, I was behind her) by a low courtesy, and
a sigh, that Johnny was too far off to hear!--Happy whelp! said I to
myself.--I withdrew; and in tript my Rose-bud, as if satisfied with the
dumb shew, and wishing nothing beyond it.

I have examined the little heart. She has made me her confidant. She
owns, she could love Johnny Barton very well: and Johnny Barton has told
her, he could love her better than any maiden he ever saw--but, alas!
it must not be thought of. Why not be thought of!--She don't know!--And
then she sighed: But Johnny has an aunt, who will give him an hundred
pounds, when his time is out; and her father cannot give her but a few
things, or so, to set her out with: and though Johnny's mother says, she
knows not where Johnny would have a prettier, or notabler wife, yet--And
then she sighed again--What signifies talking?--I would not have Johnny
be unhappy and poor for me!--For what good would that do me, you know,
Sir!

What would I give [by my soul, my angel will indeed reform me, if her
friends' implacable folly ruin us not both!--What would I give] to have
so innocent and so good a heart, as either my Rose-bud's, or Johnny's!

I have a confounded mischievous one--by nature too, I think!--A good
motion now-and-then rises from it: but it dies away presently--a love
of intrigue--an invention for mischief--a triumph in subduing--fortune
encouraging and supporting--and a constitution--What signifies
palliating? But I believe I had been a rogue, had I been a plough-boy.

But the devil's in this sex! Eternal misguiders. Who, that has once
trespassed with them, ever recovered his virtue? And yet where there is
not virtue, which nevertheless we freelivers are continually plotting
to destroy, what is there even in the ultimate of our wishes with
them?--Preparation and expectation are in a manner every thing:
reflection indeed may be something, if the mind be hardened above
feeling the guilt of a past trespass: but the fruition, what is there in
that? And yet that being the end, nature will not be satisfied without
it.

See what grave reflections an innocent subject will produce! It gives
me some pleasure to think, that it is not out of my power to reform:
but then, Jack, I am afraid I must keep better company than I do at
present--for we certainly harden one another. But be not cast down, my
boy; there will be time enough to give the whole fraternity warning to
choose another leader: and I fancy thou wilt be the man.

Mean time, as I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very
capital enormity, to do some good by way of atonement; and as I believe
I am a pretty deal indebted on that score, I intend, before I leave
these parts (successfully shall I leave them I hope, or I shall be
tempted to double the mischief by way of revenge, though not to my
Rose-bud any) to join an hundred pounds to Johnny's aunt's hundred
pounds, to make one innocent couple happy.--I repeat therefore, and for
half a dozen more therefores, spare thou my Rose-bud.

An interruption--another letter anon; and both shall go together.




LETTER XXXV

MR. LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.


I have found out by my watchful spy almost as many of my charmer's
motions, as those of the rest of her relations. It delights me to think
how the rascal is caressed by the uncles and nephew; and let into their
secrets; yet it proceeds all the time by my line of direction. I have
charged him, however, on forfeiture of his present weekly stipend, and
my future favour, to take care, that neither my beloved, nor any of
the family suspect him: I have told him that he may indeed watch her
egresses and regresses; but that only keep off other servants from her
paths; yet not to be seen by her himself.

The dear creature has tempted him, he told them, with a bribe [which she
never offered] to convey a letter [which she never wrote] to Miss Howe;
he believes, with one enclosed (perhaps to me): but he declined it: and
he begged they would take notice of it to her. This brought him a stingy
shilling; great applause; and an injunction followed it to all the
servants, for the strictest look-out, lest she should contrive some way
to send it--and, above an hour after, an order was given him to throw
himself in her way; and (expressing his concern for denying her request)
to tender his service to her, and to bring them her letter: which it
will be proper for him to report that she has refused to give him.

Now seest thou not, how many good ends this contrivance answers?

In the first place, the lady is secured by it, against her own
knowledge, in the liberty allowed her of taking her private walks in the
garden: for this attempt has confirmed them in their belief, that now
they have turned off her maid, she has no way to send a letter out of
the house: if she had, she would not have run the risque of tempting
a fellow who had not been in her secret--so that she can prosecute
unsuspectedly her correspondence with me and Miss Howe.

In the next place, it will perhaps afford me an opportunity of a private
interview with her, which I am meditating, let her take it as she will;
having found out by my spy (who can keep off every body else) that
she goes every morning and evening to a wood-house remote from the
dwelling-house, under pretence of visiting and feeding a set of
bantam-poultry, which were produced from a breed that was her
grandfather's, and of which for that reason she is very fond; as also of
some other curious fowls brought from the same place. I have an account
of all her motions here. And as she has owned to me in one of her
letters that she corresponds privately with Miss Howe, I presume it is
by this way.

The interview I am meditating, will produce her consent, I hope, to
other favours of the like kind: for, should she not choose the place
in which I am expecting to see her, I can attend her any where in the
rambling Dutch-taste garden, whenever she will permit me that honour:
for my implement, high Joseph Leman, has procured me the opportunity of
getting two keys made to the garden-door (one of which I have given him
for reasons good); which door opens to the haunted coppice, as tradition
has made the servants think it; a man having been found hanging in it
about twenty years ago: and Joseph, upon proper notice, will leave it
unbolted.

But I was obliged previously to give him my honour, that no mischief
should happen to any of my adversaries, from this liberty: for the
fellow tells me, that he loves all his masters: and, only that he knows
I am a man of honour; and that my alliance will do credit to the family;
and after prejudices are overcome, every body will think so; or he would
not for the world act the part he does.

There never was a rogue, who had not a salvo to himself for being
so.--What a praise to honesty, that every man pretends to it, even at
the instant that he knows he is pursuing the methods that will perhaps
prove him a knave to the whole world, as well as to his own conscience!

But what this stupid family can mean, to make all this necessary, I
cannot imagine. My REVENGE and my LOVE are uppermost by turns. If
the latter succeed not, the gratifying of the former will be my only
consolation: and, by all that's good, they shall feel it; although for
it I become an exile from my native country for ever.

I will throw myself into my charmer's presence. I have twice already
attempted it in vain. I shall then see what I may depend upon from her
favour. If I thought I had no prospect of that, I should be tempted to
carry her off. That would be a rape worthy of Jupiter!

But all gentle shall be my movements: all respectful, even to reverence,
my address to her--her hand shall be the only witness to the pressure
of my lip--my trembling lip: I know it will tremble, if I do not bid
it tremble. As soft my sighs, as the sighs of my gentle Rose-bud. By my
humility will I invite her confidence: the loneliness of the place shall
give me no advantage: to dissipate her fears, and engage her reliance
upon my honour for the future, shall be my whole endeavour: but
little will I complain of, not at all will I threaten, those who are
continually threatening me: but yet with a view to act the part of
Dryden's lion; to secure my love, or to let loose my vengeance upon my
hunters.

 What tho' his mighty soul his grief contains?
 He meditates revenge who least complains:
 And like a lion slumb'ring in his way,
 Or sleep dissembling, while he waits his prey,
 His fearless foes within his distance draws,
 Constrains his roaring, and contracts his paws:
 Till at the last, his time for fury found,
 He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground:
 The prostrate vulgar passes o'er, and spares,
 But, with a lordly rage, his hunter tears.




LETTER XXXVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SATURDAY, MARCH 18.


I have been frighted out of my wits--still am in a manner out of
breath--thus occasioned--I went down, under the usual pretence, in
hopes to find something from you. Concerned at my disappointment, I was
returning from the wood-house, when I heard a rustling as of somebody
behind a stack of wood. I was extremely surprised: but still more, to
behold a man coming from behind the furthermost stack. Oh! thought I, at
that moment, the sin of a prohibited correspondence!

In the same point of time that I saw him, he besought me not to be
frighted: and, still nearer approaching me, threw open a horseman's
coat: And who should it be but Mr. Lovelace!--I could not scream out
(yet attempted to scream, the moment I saw a man; and again, when I saw
who it was); for I had no voice: and had I not caught hold of a prop
which supported the old roof, I should have sunk.

I had hitherto, as you know, kept him at a distance: And now, as I
recovered myself, judge of my first emotions, when I recollected his
character from every mouth of my family; his enterprising temper; and
found myself alone with him, in a place so near a bye-lane, and so
remote from the house.

But his respectful behaviour soon dissipated these fears, and gave me
others; lest we should be seen together, and information of it given to
my brother: the consequences of which, I could readily think, would be,
if not further mischief, an imputed assignation, a stricter confinement,
a forfeited correspondence with you, my beloved friend, and a pretence
for the most violent compulsion: and neither the one set of reflections,
nor the other, acquitted him to me for his bold intrusion.

As soon therefore as I could speak, I expressed with the greatest warmth
my displeasure; and told him, that he cared not how much he exposed me
to the resentment of all my friends, provided he could gratify his own
impetuous humour. I then commanded him to leave the place that moment;
and was hurrying from him, when he threw himself in the way at my feet,
beseeching my stay for one moment; declaring, that he suffered himself
to be guilty of this rashness, as I thought it, to avoid one much
greater:--for, in short, he could not bear the hourly insults he
received from my family, with the thoughts of having so little interest
in my favour, that he could not promise himself that his patience and
forbearance would be attended with any other issue than to lose me for
ever, and be triumphed over and insulted upon it.

This man, you know, has very ready knees. You have said, that he ought,
in small points, frequently to offend, on purpose to shew what an
address he is master of.

He ran on, expressing his apprehensions that a temper so gentle and
obliging, as he said mine was, to every body but him, (and a dutifulness
so exemplary inclined me to do my part to others, whether they did
theirs or not by me,) would be wrought upon in favour of a man set up in
part to be revenged upon myself, for my grandfather's envied distinction
of me; and in part to be revenged upon him, for having given life to
one, who would have taken his; and now sought to deprive him of hopes
dearer to him than life.

I told him, he might be assured, that the severity and ill-usage I
met with would be far from effecting the proposed end: that although I
could, with great sincerity, declare for a single life (which had always
been my choice); and particularly, that if ever I married, if they would
not insist upon the man I had an aversion to, it should not be with the
man they disliked--

He interrupted me here: He hoped I would forgive him for it; but
he could not help expressing his great concern, that, after so many
instances of his passionate and obsequious devotion--

And pray, Sir, said I, let me interrupt you in my turn;--Why don't you
assert, in still plainer words, the obligation you have laid me under by
this your boasted devotion? Why don't you let me know, in terms as high
as your implication, that a perseverance I have not wished for, which
has set all my relations at variance with me, is a merit that throws
upon me the guilt of ingratitude for not having answered it as you seem
to expect?

I must forgive him, he said, if he, who pretended only to a comparative
merit, (and otherwise thought no man living could deserve me,) had
presumed to hope for a greater share in my favour, than he had hitherto
met with, when such men as Mr. Symmes, Mr. Wyerley, and now, lastly, so
vile a reptile as this Solmes, however discouraged by myself, were made
his competitors. As to the perseverance I mentioned, it was impossible
for him not to persevere: but I must needs know, that were he not in
being, the terms Solmes had proposed were such, as would have involved
me in the same difficulties with my relations that I now laboured under.
He therefore took the liberty to say, that my favour to him, far from
increasing those difficulties, would be the readiest way to extricate me
from them. They had made it impossible [he told me, with too much truth]
to oblige them any way, but by sacrificing myself to Solmes. They were
well apprized besides of the difference between the two; one, whom they
hoped to manage as they pleased; the other, who could and would protect
me from every insult; and who had natural prospects much superior to my
brother's foolish views of a title.

How comes this man to know so well all our foibles? But I more wonder,
how he came to have a notion of meeting me in this place?

I was very uneasy to be gone; and the more as the night came on apace.
But there was no getting from him, till I had heard a great deal more of
what he had to say.

As he hoped, that I would one day make him the happiest man in the
world, he assured me, that he had so much regard for my fame, that he
would be as far from advising any step that was likely to cast a shade
upon my reputation, (although that step was to be ever so much in his
own favour,) as I would be to follow such advice. But since I was not
to be permitted to live single, he would submit it to my consideration,
whether I had any way but one to avoid the intended violence to my
inclinations--my father so jealous of his authority: both my uncles in
my father's way of thinking: my cousin Morden at a distance: my uncle
and aunt Hervey awed into insignificance, was his word: my brother and
sister inflaming every one: Solmes's offers captivating: Miss Howe's
mother rather of a party with them, for motives respecting example to
her own daughter.

And then he asked me, if I would receive a letter from Lady Betty
Lawrance, on this occasion: for Lady Sarah Sadleir, he said, having
lately lost her only child, hardly looked into the world, or thought of
it farther than to wish him married, and, preferably to all the women in
the world, with me.

To be sure, my dear, there is a great deal in what the man said--I may
be allowed to say this, without an imputed glow or throb. But I told
him nevertheless, that although I had great honour for the ladies he
was related to, yet I should not choose to receive a letter on a subject
that had a tendency to promote an end I was far from intending to
promote: that it became me, ill as I was treated at present, to hope
every thing, to bear every thing, and to try ever thing: when my father
saw my steadfastness, and that I would die rather than have Mr. Solmes,
he would perhaps recede--

Interrupting me, he represented the unlikelihood there was of that,
from the courses they had entered upon; which he thus enumerated:--Their
engaging Mrs. Howe against me, in the first place, as a person I might
have thought to fly to, if pushed to desperation--my brother continually
buzzing in my father's ears, that my cousin Morden would soon arrive,
and then would insist upon giving me possession of my grandfather's
estate, in pursuance of the will; which would render me independent
of my father--their disgraceful confinement of me--their dismissing so
suddenly my servant, and setting my sister's over me--their engaging my
mother, contrary to her own judgment, against me: these, he said, were
all so many flagrant proofs that they would stick at nothing to carry
their point; and were what made him inexpressibly uneasy.

He appealed to me, whether ever I knew my father recede from any
resolution he had once fixed; especially, if he thought either
his prerogative, or his authority concerned in the question. His
acquaintance with our family, he said, enabled him to give several
instances (but they would be too grating to me) of an arbitrariness
that had few examples even in the families of princes: an arbitrariness,
which the most excellent of women, my mother, too severely experienced.
He was proceeding, as I thought, with reflections of this sort; and I
angrily told him, I would not permit my father to be reflected upon;
adding, that his severity to me, however unmerited, was not a warrant
for me to dispense with my duty to him.

He had no pleasure, he said, in urging any thing that could be so
construed; for, however well warranted he was to make such reflections
from the provocations they were continually giving him, he knew how
offensive to me any liberties of this sort would be. And yet he must
own, that it was painful to him, who had youth and passions to be
allowed for, as well as others, and who had always valued himself under
speaking his mind, to curb himself, under such treatment. Nevertheless,
his consideration for me would make him confine himself, in his
observations, to facts that were too flagrant, and too openly avowed, to
be disputed. It could not therefore justly displease, he would venture
to say, if he made this natural inference from the premises, That
if such were my father's behaviour to a wife, who disputed not the
imaginary prerogatives he was so unprecedently fond of asserting, what
room had a daughter to hope, that he would depart from an
authority he was so earnest, and so much more concerned, to
maintain?--Family-interests at the same time engaging; an aversion,
however causelessly conceived, stimulating my brother's and sister's
resentments and selfish views cooperating; and my banishment from their
presence depriving me of all personal plea or entreaty in my own favour.

How unhappy, my dear, that there is but too much reason for these
observations, and for this inference; made, likewise, with more coolness
and respect to my family than one would have apprehended from a man
so much provoked, and of passions so high, and generally thought
uncontroulable!

Will you not question me about throbs and glows, if from such instances
of a command over his fiery temper, for my sake, I am ready to infer,
that were my friends capable of a reconciliation with him, he might be
affected by arguments apparently calculated for his present and future
good! Nor is it a very bad indication, that he has such moderate notions
of that very high prerogative in husbands, of which we in our family
have been accustomed to hear so much.

He represented to me, that my present disgraceful confinement was known
to all the world: that neither my sister nor my brother scrupled to
represent me as an obliged and favoured child in a state of actual
rebellion. That, nevertheless, every body who knew me was ready to
justify me for an aversion to a man whom every body thought utterly
unworthy of me, and more fit for my sister: that unhappy as he was,
in not having been able to make any greater impression upon me in his
favour, all the world gave me to him. Nor was there but one objection
made to him by his very enemies (his birth, his prospects all very
unexceptionable, and the latter splendid); and that objection, he
thanked God, and my example, was in a fair way of being removed for
ever: since he had seen his error, and was heartily sick of the courses
he had followed; which, however, were far less enormous than malice and
envy had represented them to be. But of this he should say the less, as
it were much better to justify himself by his actions, than by the most
solemn asseverations and promises. And then, complimenting my person,
he assured me (for that he always loved virtue, although he had not
followed its rules as he ought) that he was still more captivated with
the graces of my mind: and would frankly own, that till he had the
honour to know me, he had never met with an inducement sufficient to
enable him to overcome an unhappy kind of prejudice to matrimony; which
had made him before impenetrable to the wishes and recommendations of
all his relations.

You see, my dear, he scruples not to speak of himself, as his enemies
speak of him. I can't say, but his openness in these particulars gives
a credit to his other professions. I should easily, I think, detect
an hypocrite: and this man particularly, who is said to have allowed
himself in great liberties, were he to pretend to instantaneous lights
and convictions--at this time of life too. Habits, I am sensible, are
not so easily changed. You have always joined with me in remarking, that
he will speak his mind with freedom, even to a degree of unpoliteness
sometimes; and that his very treatment of my family is a proof that he
cannot make a mean court to any body for interest sake--What pity, where
there are such laudable traces, that they should have been so mired, and
choaked up, as I may say!--We have heard, that the man's head is better
than his heart: But do you really think Mr. Lovelace can have a very bad
heart? Why should not there be something in blood in the human
creature, as well as in the ignobler animals? None of his family are
exceptionable--but himself, indeed. The characters of the ladies are
admirable. But I shall incur the imputation I wish to avoid. Yet what a
look of censoriousness does it carry in an unsparing friend, to take one
to task for doing that justice, and making those which one ought without
scruple to do, and to make, in the behalf of any other man living?

He then again pressed me to receive a letter of offered protection from
Lady Betty. He said, that people of birth stood a little too much upon
punctilio; as people of value also did (but indeed birth, worthily lived
up to, was virtue: virtue, birth; the inducements to a decent punctilio
the same; the origin of both one): [how came this notion from him!]
else, Lady Betty would write to me: but she would be willing to be first
apprized that her offer will be well received--as it would have the
appearance of being made against the liking of one part of my family;
and which nothing would induce her to make, but the degree of unworthy
persecution which I actually laboured under, and had reason further to
apprehend.

I told him, that, however greatly I thought myself obliged to Lady Betty
Lawrance, if this offer came from herself; yet it was easy to see to
what it led. It might look like vanity in me perhaps to say, that this
urgency in him, on this occasion, wore the face of art, in order to
engage me into measures from which I might not easily extricate myself.
I said, that I should not be affected by the splendour of even a royal
title. Goodness, I thought, was greatness. That the excellent characters
of the ladies of his family weighed more with me, than the consideration
that they were half-sisters to Lord M. and daughters of an earl: that
he would not have found encouragement from me, had my friends been
consenting to his address, if he had only a mere relative merit to those
ladies: since, in that case, the very reasons that made me admire them,
would have been so many objections to their kinsman.

I then assured him, that it was with infinite concern, that I had found
myself drawn into an epistolary correspondence with him; especially
since that correspondence had been prohibited: and the only agreeable
use I could think of making of this unexpected and undesired interview,
was, to let him know, that I should from henceforth think myself obliged
to discontinue it. And I hoped, that he would not have the thought of
engaging me to carry it on by menacing my relations.

There was light enough to distinguish, that he looked very grave upon
this. He so much valued my free choice, he said, and my unbiassed
favour, (scorning to set himself upon a footing with Solmes in the
compulsory methods used in that man's behalf,) that he should hate
himself, were he capable of a view of intimidating me by so very poor
a method. But, nevertheless, there were two things to be considered:
First, that the continual outrages he was treated with; the spies set
over him, one of which he had detected; the indignities all his family
were likewise treated with;--as also, myself; avowedly in malice to him,
or he should not presume to take upon himself to resent for me, without
my leave [the artful wretch saw he would have lain open here, had he not
thus guarded]--all these considerations called upon him to shew a proper
resentment: and he would leave it to me to judge, whether it would be
reasonable for him, as a man of spirit, to bear such insults, if it
were not for my sake. I would be pleased to consider, in the next place,
whether the situation I was in, (a prisoner in my father's house, and my
whole family determined to compel me to marry a man unworthy of me, and
that speedily, and whether I consented or not,) admitted of delay in the
preventive measures he was desirous to put me upon, in the last resort
only. Nor was there a necessity, he said, if I were actually in Lady
Betty's protection, that I should be his, if, afterwards, I should see
any thing objectionable in his conduct.

But what would the world conclude would be the end, I demanded, were I,
in the last resort, as he proposed, to throw myself into the protection
of his friends, but that it was with such a view?

And what less did the world think of me now, he asked, than that I was
confined that I might not? You are to consider, Madam, you have not now
an option; and to whom is it owing that you have not; and that you
are in the power of those (parents, why should I call them?) who are
determined, that you shall not have an option. All I propose is, that
you will embrace such a protection--but not till you have tried every
way, to avoid the necessity for it.

And give me leave to say, proceeded he, that if a correspondence, on
which I have founded all my hopes, is, at this critical conjuncture, to
be broken off; and if you are resolved not to be provided against the
worst; it must be plain to me, that you will at last yield to that
worst--worst to me only--it cannot be to you--and then! [and he put his
hand clenched to his forehead] How shall I bear this supposition?--Then
will you be that Solmes's!--But, by all that's sacred, neither he, nor
your brother, nor your uncles, shall enjoy their triumph--Perdition
seize my soul, if they shall!

The man's vehemence frightened me: yet, in resentment, I would have
left him; but, throwing himself at my feet again, Leave me not thus--I
beseech you, dearest Madam, leave me not thus, in despair! I kneel not,
repenting of what I have vowed in such a case as that I have supposed.
I re-vow it, at your feet!--and so he did. But think not it is by way
of menace, or to intimidate you to favour me. If your heart inclines
you [and then he arose] to obey your father (your brother rather) and to
have Solmes; although I shall avenge myself on those who have insulted
me, for their insults to myself and family, yet will I tear out my heart
from this bosom (if possible with my own hands) were it to scruple to
give up its ardours to a woman capable of such a preference.

I told him, that he talked to me in very high language; but he might
assure himself that I never would have Mr. Solmes, (yet that this I said
not in favour to him,) and I had declared as much to my relations, were
there not such a man as himself in the world.

Would I declare, that I would still honour him with my
correspondence?--He could not bear, that, hoping to obtain greater
instances of my favour, he should forfeit the only one he had to boast
of.

I bid him forbear rashness or resentment to any of my family, and I
would, for some time at least, till I saw what issue my present trials
were likely to have, proceed with a correspondence, which, nevertheless,
my heart condemned--

And his spirit him, the impatient creature said, interrupting me, for
bearing what he did; when he considered, that the necessity of it was
imposed upon him, not by my will, (for then he would bear it cheerfully,
and a thousand times more,) but by creatures--And there he stopt.

I told him plainly that he might thank himself (whose indifferent
character, as to morals, had given such a handle against him) for all.
It was but just, that a man should be spoken evil of, who set no value
upon his reputation.

He offered to vindicate himself. But I told him, I would judge him by
his own rule--by his actions, not by his professions.

Were not his enemies, he said, so powerful, and so determined; and had
they not already shewn their intentions in such high acts of even cruel
compulsion; but would leave me to my choice, or to my desire of living
single; he would have been content to undergo a twelvemonth's probation,
or more: but he was confident, that one month would either complete all
their purposes, or render them abortive: and I best knew what hopes I
had of my father's receding--he did not know him, if I had any.

I said, I would try every method, that either my duty or my influence
upon any of them should suggest, before I would put myself into any
other protection: and, if nothing else would do, would resign the envied
estate; and that I dared to say would.

He was contented, he said, to abide that issue. He should be far from
wishing me to embrace any other protection, but, as he had frequently
said, in the last necessity. But dearest creature, said he, catching
my hand with ardour, and pressing it to his lips, if the yielding up
of that estate will do--resign it--and be mine--and I will corroborate,
with all my soul, your resignation!

This was not ungenerously said: But what will not these men say to
obtain belief, and a power over one?

I made many efforts to go; and now it was so dark, that I began to have
great apprehensions. I cannot say from his behaviour: indeed, he has a
good deal raised himself in my opinion by the personal respect, even to
reverence, which he paid me during the whole conference: for, although
he flamed out once, upon a supposition that Solmes might succeed, it was
upon a supposition that would excuse passion, if any thing could, you
know, in a man pretending to love with fervour; although it was so
levelled, that I could not avoid resenting it.

He recommended himself to my favour at parting, with great earnestness,
yet with as great submission; not offering to condition any thing with
me; although he hinted his wishes for another meeting: which I forbad
him ever attempting again in the same place. And I will own to you,
from whom I should be really blamable to conceal any thing, that his
arguments (drawn from the disgraceful treatment I meet with) of what
I am to expect, make me begin to apprehend that I shall be under an
obligation to be either the one man's or the other's--and, if so, I
fancy I shall not incur your blame, were I to say which of the two it
must be: you have said, which it must not be. But, O my dear, the single
life is by far the most eligible to me: indeed it is. And I hope yet to
be permitted to make that option.

I got back without observation; but the apprehension that I should
not, gave me great uneasiness; and made me begin a letter in a greater
flutter than he gave me cause to be in, except at the first seeing him;
for then indeed my spirits failed me; and it was a particular felicity,
that, in such a place, in such a fright, and alone with him, I fainted
not away.

I should add, that having reproached him with his behaviour the last
Sunday at church, he solemnly assured me, that it was not what had been
represented to me: that he did not expect to see me there: but hoped to
have an opportunity to address himself to my father, and to be permitted
to attend him home. But that the good Dr. Lewen had persuaded him not
to attempt speaking to any of the family, at that time; observing to him
the emotions into which his presence had put every body. He intended
no pride, or haughtiness of behaviour, he assured me; and that the
attributing such to him was the effect of that ill-will which he had
the mortification to find insuperable: adding, that when he bowed to my
mother, it was a compliment he intended generally to every one in the
pew, as well as to her, whom he sincerely venerated.

If he may be believed, (and I should think he would not have come
purposely to defy my family, yet expect favour from me,) one may see,
my dear, the force of hatred, which misrepresents all things. Yet why
should Shorey (except officiously to please her principals) make a
report in his disfavour? He told me, that he would appeal to Dr. Lewen
for his justification on this head; adding, that the whole conversation
between the Doctor and him turned upon his desire to attempt to
reconcile himself to us all, in the face of the church; and upon
the Doctor's endeavouring to dissuade him from making such a public
overture, till he knew how it would be accepted. But to what purpose
his appeal, when I am debarred from seeing that good man, or any one who
would advise me what to do in my present difficult situation!

I fancy, my dear, however, that there would hardly be a guilty person in
the world, were each suspected or accused person to tell his or her own
story, and be allowed any degree of credit.

I have written a very long letter.

To be so particular as you require in subjects of conversation, it is
impossible to be short.

I will add to it only the assurance, That I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate and faithful friend and servant, CLARISSA HARLOWE.

You'll be so good, my dear, as to remember, that the date of your last
letter to me was the 9th.




LETTER XXXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE. SUNDAY, MARCH 19.


I beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for having given you occasion to
remind me of the date of my last. I was willing to have before me as
much of the workings of your wise relations as possible; being verily
persuaded, that one side or the other would have yielded by this
time: and then I should have had some degree of certainty to found my
observations upon. And indeed what can I write that I have not already
written?--You know, that I can do nothing but rave at your stupid
persecutors: and that you don't like. I have advised you to resume your
own estate: that you won't do. You cannot bear the thoughts of having
their Solmes: and Lovelace is resolved you shall be his, let who will
say to the contrary. I think you must be either the one man's or the
other's. Let us see what their next step will be.

As to Lovelace, while he tells his own story (having also behaved so
handsomely on his intrusion in the wood-house, and intended so well at
church) who can say, that the man is in the least blameworthy?--Wicked
people! to combine against so innocent a man!--But, as I said, let us
see what their next step will be, and what course you will take upon it;
and then we may be the more enlightened.

As to your change of style to your uncles, and brother and sister, since
they were so fond of attributing to you a regard for Lovelace, and would
not be persuaded to the contrary; and since you only strengthened their
arguments against yourself by denying it; you did but just as I would
have done, in giving way to their suspicions, and trying what that would
do--But if--but if--Pray, my dear, indulge me a little--you yourself
think it was necessary to apologize to me for that change of style to
them--and till you will speak out like a friend to her unquestionable
friend, I must tease you a little--let it run therefore; for it will
run--

If, then, there be not a reason for this change of style, which you have
not thought fit to give me, be so good as to watch, as I once before
advised you, how the cause for it will come on--Why should it be
permitted to steal upon you, and you know nothing of the matter?

When we get a great cold, we are apt to puzzle ourselves to find out
when it began, or how we got it; and when that is accounted for, down
we sit contented, and let it have its course; or, if it be very
troublesome, take a sweat, or use other means to get rid of it. So
my dear, before the malady you wot of, yet wot not of, grows so
importunate, as that you must be obliged to sweat it out, let me advise
you to mind how it comes on. For I am persuaded, as surely as that I am
now writing to you, that the indiscreet violence of your friends on the
one hand, and the insinuating address of Lovelace on the other, (if the
man be not a greater fool than any body thinks him,) will effectually
bring it to this, and do all his work for him.

But let it--if it must be Lovelace or Solmes, the choice cannot admit of
debate. Yet if all be true that is reported, I should prefer almost any
of your other lovers to either; unworthy as they also are. But who can
be worthy of a Clarissa?

I wish you are not indeed angry with me for harping so much on one
string. I must own, that I should think myself inexcusable so to do,
(the rather, as I am bold enough to imagine it a point out of all doubt
from fifty places in your letters, were I to labour the proof,) if you
would ingenuously own--

Own what? you'll say. Why, my Anna Howe, I hope you don't think that I
am already in love--!

No, to be sure! How can your Anna Howe have such a thought?--What then
shall we call it? You might have helped me to a phrase--A conditional
kind of liking!--that's it.--O my friend! did I not know how much you
despise prudery; and that you are too young, and too lovely, to be a
prude--

But, avoiding such hard names, let me tell you one thing, my dear (which
nevertheless I have told you before); and that is this: that I shall
think I have reason to be highly displeased with you, if, when you write
to me, you endeavour to keep from me any secret of your heart.

Let me add, that if you would clearly and explicitly tell me, how far
Lovelace has, or has not, a hold in your affections, I could better
advise you what to do, than at present I can. You, who are so famed
for prescience, as I may call it; and than whom no young lady ever had
stronger pretensions to a share of it; have had, no doubt, reasonings
in your heart about him, supposing you were to be one day his: [no doubt
but you have had the same in Solmes's case: whence the ground for the
hatred of the one; and for the conditional liking of the other.] Will
you tell me, my dear, what you have thought of Lovelace's best and of
his worst?--How far eligible for the first; how far rejectable for the
last?--Then weighing both parts in opposite scales, we shall see which
is likely to preponderate; or rather which does preponderate. Nothing
less than the knowledge of the inmost recesses of your heart, can
satisfy my love and my friendship. Surely, you are not afraid to trust
yourself with a secret of this nature: if you are, then you may the more
allowably doubt me. But, I dare say, you will not own either--nor is
there, I hope, cause for either.

Be pleased to observe one thing, my dear, that whenever I have given
myself any of those airs of raillery, which have seemed to make you look
about you, (when, likewise, your case may call for a more serious turn
from a sympathizing friend,) it has not been upon those passages which
are written, though, perhaps not intended, with such explicitness [don't
be alarmed, my dear!] as leaves little cause of doubt: but only when you
affect reserve; when you give new words for common things; when you
come with your curiosities, with your conditional likings, and with your
PRUDE-encies [mind how I spell the word] in a case that with every other
person defies all prudence--over-acts of treason all these, against the
sovereign friendship we have avowed to each other.

Remember, that you found me out in a moment. You challenged me. I owned
directly, that there was only my pride between the man and me; for I
could not endure, I told you, to think of any fellow living to give me a
moment's uneasiness. And then my man, as I have elsewhere said, was not
such a one as yours: so I had reason to impute full as much as to my own
inconsideration, as to his power over me: nay, more: but still more
to yours. For you reasoned me out of the curiosity first; and when the
liking was brought to be conditional--why then, you know, I throbbed no
more about him.

O! pray now, as you say, now I have mentioned that my fellow was not
such a charming fellow as yours, let Miss Biddulph, Miss Lloyd, Miss
Campion, and me, have your opinion, how far figure ought to engage us:
with a view to your own case, however--mind that--as Mr. Tony says--and
whether at all, if the man be vain of it; since, as you observe in a
former, that vanity is a stop-short pride in such a one, that would make
one justly doubt the worthiness of his interior. You, our pattern, so
lovely in feature, so graceful in person, have none of it; and have
therefore with the best grace always held, that it is not excusable even
in a woman.

You must know, that this subject was warmly debated among us in our last
conversation: and Miss Lloyd wished me to write to you upon it for your
opinion; to which, in every debated case, we always paid the greatest
deference. I hope you will not be so much engrossed by your weighty
cares, as not to have freedom of spirits enough to enter upon the task.
You know how much we all admire your opinion on such topics; which ever
produces something new and instructive, as you handle the subjects. And
pray tell us, to what you think it owing, that your man seems so careful
to adorn that self-adorned person of his! yet so manages, that one
cannot for one's heart think him a coxcomb?--Let this question, and the
above tasks, divert, and not displease you, my dear. One subject, though
ever so important, could never yet engross your capacious mind. If
they should displease you, you must recollect the many instances of my
impertinence which you have forgiven, and then say, 'This is a mad girl:
but yet I love her!--And she is my own'

ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY, MARCH 20.


Your last so sensibly affects me, that I must postpone every other
consideration, however weighty, to reply to it: and this I will do
very distinctly, and with all the openness of heart which our mutual
friendship demands.

But let me observe, in the first place, gratefully observe, that if I
have in fifty passages of my letters given you such undoubted proofs of
my value for Mr. Lovelace, that you have spared me for the sake of my
explicitness, it is acting by me with a generosity worthy of yourself.

But lives the man, think you, who is so very bad, that he does not give
even a doubting mind reason at one time to be better pleased with him
than at another? And when that reason offers, is it not just to express
one's self accordingly? I would do the man who addresses me as much
justice, as if he did not address me: it has such a look of tyranny, it
appears so ungenerous, methinks, in our sex, to use a man worse for his
respect to us, (no other cause for disrespect occurring,) that I would
not by any means be that person who should do so.

But, although I may intend no more than justice, it will perhaps be
difficult to hinder those who know the man's views, from construing it
as a partial favour: and especially if the eager-eyed observer has been
formerly touched herself, and would triumph that her friend had been no
more able to escape than she. Noble minds, emulative of perfection, (and
yet the passion properly directed, I do not take to be an imperfection
neither,) may be allowed a little generous envy, I think.

If I meant by this a reflection, by way of revenge, it is but a revenge,
my dear, in the soft sense of the word. I love, as I have told you, your
pleasantry. Although at the time your reproof may pain me a little; yet,
on recollection, when I find it more of the cautioning friend than
of the satirizing observer, I shall be all gratitude upon it. All the
business will be this; I shall be sensible of the pain in the present
letter perhaps; but I shall thank you in the next, and ever after.

In this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for a little of
that sensibility which you find above, and perhaps still more, as I
proceed.--You frequently remind me, by an excellent example, your own to
me, that I must not spare you!

I am not conscious, that I have written any thing of this man, that has
not been more in his dispraise than in his favour. Such is the man, that
I think I must have been faulty, and ought to take myself to account,
if I had not. But you think otherwise, I will not put you upon labouring
the proof, as you call it. My conduct must then have a faulty appearance
at least, and I will endeavour to rectify it. But of this I assure you,
that whatever interpretation my words were capable of, I intended not
any reserve to you. I wrote my heart at the time: if I had had thought
of disguising it, or been conscious that there was reason for doing
so, perhaps I had not given you the opportunity of remarking upon my
curiosity after his relations' esteem for me; nor upon my conditional
liking, and such-like. All I intended by the first, I believe, I
honestly told you at the time. To that letter I therefore refer, whether
it make for me, or against me: and by the other, that I might bear in
mind, what it became a person of my sex and character to be and to
do, in such an unhappy situation, where the imputed love is thought an
undutiful, and therefore a criminal passion; and where the supported
object of it is a man of faulty morals too. And I am sure you will
excuse my desire of appearing at those times the person I ought to be;
had I no other view in it but to merit the continuance of your good
opinion.

But that I may acquit myself of having reserves--O, my dear, I must here
break off--!




LETTER XXXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY, MARCH 12.


This letter will account to you, my dear, for my abrupt breaking off in
the answer I was writing to yours of yesterday; and which, possibly,
I shall not be able to finish and send you till to-morrow or next day;
having a great deal to say to the subjects you put to me in it. What
I am now to give you are the particulars of another effort made by my
friends, through the good Mrs. Norton.

It seems they had sent to her yesterday, to be here this day, to take
their instructions, and to try what she could do with me. It would,
at least, I suppose they thought, have this effect; to render me
inexcusable with her; or to let her see, that there was no room for the
expostulations she had often wanted to make in my favour to my mother.

The declaration, that my heart was free, afforded them an argument to
prove obstinacy and perverseness upon me; since it could be nothing else
that governed me in my opposition to their wills, if I had no particular
esteem for another man. And now, that I have given them reason (in
order to obviate this argument) to suppose that I have a preference to
another, they are resolved to carry their schemes into execution as soon
as possible. And in order to do this, they sent for this good woman, for
whom they know I have even a filial regard.

She found assembled my father and mother, my brother and sister, my two
uncles, and my aunt Hervey.

My brother acquainted her with all that had passed since she was last
permitted to see me; with the contents of my letters avowing my regard
for Mr. Lovelace (as they all interpreted them); with the substance of
their answers to them; and with their resolutions.

My mother spoke next; and delivered herself to this effect, as the good
woman told me.

After reciting how many times I had been indulged in my refusals of
different men, and the pains she had taken with me, to induce me to
oblige my whole family in one instance out of five or six, and my
obstinacy upon it; 'O my good Mrs. Norton, said the dear lady, could
you have thought, that my Clarissa and your Clarissa was capable of so
determined an opposition to the will of parents so indulgent to her? But
see what you can do with her. The matter is gone too far to be receded
from on our parts. Her father had concluded every thing with Mr. Solmes,
not doubting her compliance. Such noble settlements, Mrs. Norton, and
such advantages to the whole family!--In short, she has it in her power
to lay an obligation upon us all. Mr. Solmes, knowing she has good
principles, and hoping by his patience now, and good treatment
hereafter, to engage her gratitude, and by degrees her love, is willing
to overlook all!--'

[Overlook all, my dear! Mr. Solmes to overlook all! There's a word!]

'So, Mrs. Norton, if you are convinced, that it is a child's duty to
submit to her parents' authority, in the most important point as well as
in the least, I beg you will try your influence over her: I have none:
her father has none: her uncles neither: although it is her apparent
interest to oblige us all; for, on that condition, her grandfather's
estate is not half of what, living and dying, is purposed to be done for
her. If any body can prevail with her, it is you; and I hope you will
heartily enter upon this task.'

The good woman asked, Whether she was permitted to expostulate with them
upon the occasion, before she came up to me?

My arrogant brother told her, she was sent for to expostulate with his
sister, and not with them. And this, Goody Norton [she is always
Goody with him!] you may tell her, that the treaty with Mr. Solmes is
concluded: that nothing but her compliance with her duty is wanting;
of consequence, that there is no room for your expostulation, or hers
either.

Be assured of this, Mrs. Norton, said my father, in an angry tone, that
we will not be baffled by her. We will not appear like fools in this
matter, and as if we have no authority over our own daughter. We will
not, in short, be bullied out of our child by a cursed rake, who had
like to have killed our only son!--And so she had better make a merit
of her obedience; for comply she shall, if I live; independent as she
thinks my father's indiscreet bounty has made her of me, her father.
Indeed, since that, she has never been like she was before. An unjust
bequest!--And it is likely to prosper accordingly!--But if she marry
that vile rake Lovelace, I will litigate every shilling with her: tell
her so; and that the will may be set aside, and shall.

My uncles joined, with equal heat.

My brother was violent in his declarations.

My sister put in with vehemence, on the same side.

My aunt Hervey was pleased to say, there was no article so proper for
parents to govern in, as this of marriage: and it was very fit mine
should be obliged.

Thus instructed, the good woman came up to me. She told me all that had
passed, and was very earnest with me to comply; and so much justice did
she to the task imposed upon her, that I more than once thought, that
her own opinion went with theirs. But when she saw what an immovable
aversion I had to the man, she lamented with me their determined
resolution: and then examined into the sincerity of my declaration,
that I would gladly compound with them by living single. Of this being
satisfied, she was so convinced that this offer, which, carried into
execution, would exclude Lovelace effectually, ought to be accepted,
that she would go down (although I told her, it was what I had tendered
over-and-over to no purpose) and undertake to be guaranty for me on that
score.

She went accordingly; but soon returned in tears; being used harshly for
urging this alternative:--They had a right to my obedience upon their
own terms, they said: my proposal was an artifice, only to gain time:
nothing but marrying Mr. Solmes should do: they had told me so before:
they should not be at rest till it was done; for they knew what an
interest Lovelace had in my heart: I had as good as owned it in my
letters to my uncles, and brother and sister, although I had most
disingenuously declared otherwise to my mother. I depended, they said,
upon their indulgence, and my own power over them: they would not
have banished me from their presence, if they had not known that their
consideration for me was greater than mine for them. And they would
be obeyed, or I never should be restored to their favour, let the
consequence be what it would.

My brother thought fit to tell the good woman, that her whining nonsense
did but harden me. There was a perverseness, he said, in female minds, a
tragedy-pride, that would make a romantic young creature, such a one as
me, risque any thing to obtain pity. I was of an age, and a turn [the
insolent said] to be fond of a lover-like distress: and my grief (which
she pleaded) would never break my heart: I should sooner break that of
the best and most indulgent of mothers. He added, that she might once
more go up to me: but that, if she prevailed not, he should suspect,
that the man they all hated had found a way to attach her to his
interest.

Every body blamed him for this unworthy reflection; which greatly
affected the good woman. But nevertheless he said, and nobody
contradicted him, that if she could not prevail upon her sweet child,
[as it seems she had fondly called me,] she had best draw to her own
home, and there tarry till she was sent for; and so leave her sweet
child to her father's management.

Sure nobody had ever so insolent, so hard-hearted a brother, as I have!
So much resignation to be expected from me! So much arrogance, and to so
good a woman, and of so fine an understanding, to be allowed in him.

She nevertheless told him, that however she might be ridiculed for
speaking of the sweetness of my disposition, she must take upon herself
to say, that there never was a sweeter in the sex: and that she had
ever found, that my mild methods, and gentleness, I might at any time be
prevailed upon, even in points against my own judgment and opinion.

My aunt Hervey hereupon said, It was worth while to consider what
Mrs. Norton said: and that she had sometimes allowed herself to doubt,
whether I had been begun with by such methods as generous tempers are
only to be influenced by, in cases where their hearts are supposed to be
opposite to the will of their friends.

She had both my brother and sister upon her for this: who referred to
my mother, whether she had not treated me with an indulgence that had
hardly any example?

My mother said, she must own, that no indulgence had been wanting from
her: but she must needs say, and had often said it, that the reception
I met with on my return from Miss Howe, and the manner in which the
proposal of Mr. Solmes was made to me, (which was such as left nothing
to my choice,) and before I had an opportunity to converse with him,
were not what she had by any means approved of.

She was silenced, you will guess by whom,--with, My dear!--my dear!--You
have ever something to say, something to palliate, for this rebel of a
girl!--Remember her treatment of you, of me!--Remember, that the wretch,
whom we so justly hate, would not dare persist in his purposes, but for
her encouragement of him, and obstinacy to us.--Mrs. Norton, [angrily to
her,] go up to her once more--and if you think gentleness will do, you
have a commission to be gentle--if it will not, never make use of that
plea again.

Ay, my good woman, said my mother, try your force with her. My sister
Hervey and I will go up to her, and bring her down in our hands, to
receive her father's blessing, and assurances of every body's love, if
she will be prevailed upon: and, in that case, we will all love you the
better for your good offices.

She came up to me, and repeated all these passages with tears. But I
told her, that after what had passed between us, she could not hope to
prevail upon me to comply with measures so wholly my brother's, and so
much to my aversion. And then folding me to her maternal bosom, I leave
you, my dearest Miss, said she--I leave you, because I must!--But let me
beseech you to do nothing rashly; nothing unbecoming your character. If
all be true that is said, Mr. Lovelace cannot deserve you. If you can
comply, remember it is your duty to comply. They take not, I own, the
right method with so generous a spirit. But remember, that there would
not be any merit in your compliance, if it were not to be against
your own liking. Remember also, what is expected from a character
so extraordinary as yours: remember, it is in your power to unite or
disunite your whole family for ever. Although it should at present be
disagreeable to you to be thus compelled, your prudence, I dare say,
when you consider the matter seriously, will enable you to get over
all prejudices against the one, and all prepossessions in favour of the
other: and then the obligation you will lay all your family under,
will be not only meritorious in you, with regard to them, but in a few
months, very probably, highly satisfactory, as well as reputable, to
yourself.

Consider, my dear Mrs. Norton, said I, only consider, that it is not a
small thing that is insisted upon; not for a short duration; it is for
my life: consider too, that all this is owing to an overbearing brother,
who governs every body. Consider how desirous I am to oblige them, if
a single life, and breaking all correspondence with the man they hate,
because my brother hates him, will do it.

I consider every thing, my dearest Miss: and, added to what I have said,
do you only consider, that if, by pursuing your own will, and rejecting
theirs, you should be unhappy, you will be deprived of all that
consolation which those have, who have been directed by their parents,
although the event prove not answerable to their wishes.

I must go, repeated she: your brother will say [and she wept] that I
harden you by my whining nonsense. 'Tis indeed hard, that so much
regard should be paid to the humours of one child, and so little to
the inclination of another. But let me repeat, that it is your duty to
acquiesce, if you can acquiesce: your father has given your brother's
schemes his sanction, and they are now his. Mr. Lovelace, I doubt,
is not a man that will justify your choice so much as he will their
dislike. It is easy to see that your brother has a view in discrediting
you with all your friends, with your uncles in particular: but for that
very reason, you should comply, if possible, in order to disconcert his
ungenerous measures. I will pray for you; and that is all I can do for
you. I must now go down, and make a report, that you are resolved never
to have Mr. Solmes--Must I?--Consider, my dear Miss Clary--Must I?

Indeed you must!--But of this I do assure you, that I will do nothing to
disgrace the part you have had in my education. I will bear every thing
that shall be short of forcing my hand into his who never can have any
share in my heart. I will try by patient duty, by humility, to overcome
them. But death will I choose, in any shape, rather than that man.

I dread to go down, said she, with so determined an answer: they will
have no patience with me.--But let me leave you with one observation,
which I beg of you always to bear in mind:--

'That persons of prudence, and distinguished talents, like yours, seem
to be sprinkled through the world, to give credit, by their example, to
religion and virtue. When such persons wilfully err, how great must
be the fault! How ungrateful to that God, who blessed them with such
talents! What a loss likewise to the world! What a wound to virtue!--But
this, I hope, will never be to be said of Miss Clarissa Harlowe!'

I could give her no answer, but by my tears. And I thought, when she
went away, the better half of my heart went with her.

I listened to hear what reception she would meet with below; and found
it was just such a one as she had apprehended.

Will she, or will she not, be Mrs. Solmes? None of your whining
circumlocutions, Mrs. Norton!--[You may guess who said this] Will she,
or will she not, comply with her parents' will?

This cut short all she was going to say.

If I must speak so briefly, Miss will sooner die, than have--

Any body but Lovelace! interrupted my brother.--This, Madam, this, Sir,
is your meek daughter! This is Mrs. Norton's sweet child!--Well, Goody,
you may return to your own habitation. I am empowered to forbid you to
have any correspondence with this perverse girl for a month to come, as
you value the favour of our whole family, or of any individual of it.

And saying this, uncontradicted by any body, he himself shewed her
to the door,--no doubt, with all that air of cruel insult, which the
haughty rich can put on to the unhappy low, who have not pleased them.

So here, my dear Miss Howe, am I deprived of the advice of one of the
most prudent and conscientious women in the world, were I to have ever
so much occasion for it.

I might indeed write (as I presume, under your cover) and receive her
answers to what I should write. But should such a correspondence be
charged upon her, I know she would not be guilty of a falsehood for the
world, nor even of an equivocation: and should she own it after this
prohibition, she would forfeit my mother's favour for ever. And in my
dangerous fever, some time ago, I engaged my mother to promise me, that,
if I died before I could do any thing for the good woman, she would set
her above want for the rest of her life, should her eyes fail her, or
sickness befall her, and she could not provide for herself, as she now
so prettily does by her fine needle-works.

What measures will they fall upon next?--Will they not recede when they
find that it must be a rooted antipathy, and nothing else, that could
make a temper, not naturally inflexible, so sturdy?

Adieu, my dear. Be you happy!--To know that it is in your power to be
so, is all that seems wanting to make you so.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XL

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [In continuation of the subject in
Letter XXXVIII.]


I will now, though midnight (for I have no sleep in my eyes) resume
the subject I was forced so abruptly to quit, and will obey yours, Miss
Lloyd's, Miss Campion's, and Miss Biddulph's call, with as much temper
as my divided thought will admit. The dead stillness of this solemn hour
will, I hope, contribute to calm my disturbed mind.

In order to acquit myself of so heavy a charge as that of having
reserves to so dear a friend, I will acknowledge (and I thought I had
over-and-over) that it is owing to my particular situation, if Mr.
Lovelace appears to me in a tolerable light: and I take upon me to say,
that had they opposed to him a man of sense, of virtue, of generosity;
one who enjoyed his fortune with credit, who had a tenderness in his
nature for the calamities of others, which would have given a moral
assurance, that he would have been still less wanting in grateful
returns to an obliging spirit:--had they opposed such a man as this to
Mr. Lovelace, and been as earnest to have me married, as now they are,
I do not know myself, if they would have had reason to tax me with that
invincible obstinacy which they lay to my charge: and this whatever
had been the figure of the man; since the heart is what we women should
judge by in the choice we make, as the best security for the party's
good behaviour in every relation of life.

But, situated as I am, thus persecuted and driven, I own to you, that
I have now-and-then had a little more difficulty than I wished for, in
passing by Mr. Lovelace's tolerable qualities, to keep up my dislike to
him for his others.

You say, I must have argued with myself in his favour, and in his
disfavour, on a supposition, that I might possibly be one day his. I
own that I have: and thus called upon by my dearest friend, I will set
before you both parts of the argument.

And first, what occurred to me in his favour.

At his introduction into our family, his negative virtues were insisted
upon:--He was no gamester; no horse-racer; no fox-hunter; no drinker:
my poor aunt Hervey had, in confidence, given us to apprehend much
disagreeable evil (especially to a wife of the least delicacy) from a
wine-lover: and common sense instructed us, that sobriety in a man is
no small point to be secured, when so many mischiefs happen daily from
excess. I remember, that my sister made the most of this favourable
circumstance in his character while she had any hopes of him.

He was never thought to be a niggard; not even ungenerous: nor when
his conduct came to be inquired into, an extravagant, a squanderer: his
pride [so far was it a laudable pride] secured him from that. Then he
was ever ready to own his errors. He was no jester upon sacred things:
poor Mr. Wyerley's fault; who seemed to think there was wit in saying
bold things, which would shock a serious mind. His conversation with us
was always unexceptionable, even chastely so; which, be his actions what
they would, shewed him capable of being influenced by decent company;
and that he might probably therefore be a led man, rather than a leader,
in other company. And one late instance, so late as last Saturday
evening, has raised him not a little in my opinion, with regard to this
point of good (and at the same time, of manly) behaviour.

As to the advantage of birth, that is of his side, above any man who has
been found out for me. If we may judge by that expression of his,
which you were pleased with at the time; 'That upon true quality, and
hereditary distinction, if good sense were not wanting, humour sat as
easy as his glove;' that, with as familiar an air, was his familiar
expression; 'while none but the prosperous upstart, MUSHROOMED into
rank, (another of his peculiars,) was arrogantly proud of it.'--If, I
say, we may judge of him by this, we shall conclude in his favour, that
he knows what sort of behaviour is to be expected from persons of birth,
whether he act up to it or not. Conviction is half way to amendment.

His fortunes in possession are handsome; in expectation, splendid: so
nothing need be said on that subject.

But it is impossible, say some, that he should make a tender or kind
husband. Those who are for imposing upon me such a man as Mr. Solmes,
and by methods so violent, are not entitled to make this objection. But
now, on this subject, let me tell you how I have argued with myself--for
still you must remember, that I am upon the extenuating part of his
character.

A great deal of the treatment a wife may expect from him, will possibly
depend upon herself. Perhaps she must practise as well as promise
obedience, to a man so little used to controul; and must be careful to
oblige. And what husband expects not this?--The more perhaps if he had
not reason to assure himself of the preferable love of his wife before
she became such. And how much easier and pleasanter to obey the man of
her choice, if he should be even more unreasonable sometimes, than one
she would not have had, could she have avoided it? Then, I think, as
the men were the framers of the matrimonial office, and made obedience
a part of the woman's vow, she ought not, even in policy, to shew him,
that she can break through her part of the contract, (however lightly
she may think of the instance,) lest he should take it into his head
(himself is judge) to think as lightly of other points, which she may
hold more important--but, indeed, no point so solemnly vowed can be
slight.

Thus principled, and acting accordingly, what a wretch must that husband
be, who could treat such a wife brutally!--Will Lovelace's wife be the
only person to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of civility and
good manners? He is allowed to be brave: Who ever knew a brave man, if a
brave man of sense, an universally base man? And how much the gentleness
of our sex, and the manner of our training up and education, make us
need the protection of the brave, and the countenance of the generous,
let the general approbation, which we are all so naturally inclined to
give to men of that character, testify.

At worst, will he confine me prisoner to my chamber? Will he deny me the
visits of my dearest friend, and forbid me to correspond with her? Will
he take from me the mistressly management, which I had not faultily
discharged? Will he set a servant over me, with license to insult me?
Will he, as he has not a sister, permit his cousins Montague, or would
either of those ladies accept of a permission, to insult and tyrannize
over me?--It cannot be.--Why then, think I often, do you tempt me, O my
cruel friends, to try the difference?

And then has the secret pleasure intruded itself, to be able to reclaim
such a man to the paths of virtue and honour: to be a secondary means,
if I were to be his, of saving him, and preventing the mischiefs so
enterprising a creature might otherwise be guilty of, if he be such a
one.

When I have thought of him in these lights, (and that as a man of sense
he will sooner see his errors, than another,) I own to you, that I have
had some difficulty to avoid taking the path they so violently endeavour
to make me shun: and all that command of my passions which has been
attributed to me as my greatest praise, and, in so young a creature, as
my distinction, has hardly been sufficient for me.

And let me add, that the favour of his relations (all but himself
unexceptionable) has made a good deal of additional weight, thrown in
the same scale.

But now, in his disfavour. When I have reflected upon the prohibition
of my parents; the giddy appearance, disgraceful to our sex, that such
a preference would have: that there is no manner of likelihood, enflamed
by the rencounter, and upheld by art and ambition on my brother's side,
that ever the animosity will be got over: that I must therefore be at
perpetual variance with all my own family: that I must go to him, and to
his, as an obliged and half-fortuned person: that his aversion to them
all is as strong as theirs to him: that his whole family are hated
for his sake; they hating ours in return: that he has a very immoral
character as to women: that knowing this, it is a high degree of
impurity to think of joining in wedlock with such a man: that he is
young, unbroken, his passions unsubdued: that he is violent in his
temper, yet artful; I am afraid vindictive too: that such a husband
might unsettle me in all my own principles, and hazard my future hopes:
that his own relations, two excellent aunts, and an uncle, from whom
he has such large expectations, have no influence upon him: that what
tolerable qualities he has, are founded more in pride than in virtue:
that allowing, as he does, the excellency of moral precepts, and
believing the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, he can live as
if he despised the one, and defied the other: the probability that the
taint arising from such free principles, may go down into the manners
of posterity: that I knowing these things, and the importance of them,
should be more inexcusable than one who knows them not; since an error
against judgment is worse, infinitely worse, than an error in judgment.
Reflecting upon these things, I cannot help conjuring you, my dear, to
pray with me, and to pray for me, that I may not be pushed upon such
indiscreet measures, as will render me inexcusable to myself: for that
is the test, after all. The world's opinion ought to be but a secondary
consideration.

I have said in his praise, that he is extremely ready to own his errors:
but I have sometimes made a great drawback upon this article, in his
disfavour; having been ready to apprehend, that this ingenuousness may
possibly be attributable to two causes, neither of them, by any means,
creditable to him. The one, that his vices are so much his masters, that
he attempts not to conquer them; the other, that he may think it policy,
to give up one half of his character to save the other, when the
whole may be blamable: by this means, silencing by acknowledgment
the objections he cannot answer; which may give him the praise of
ingenuousness, when he can obtain no other, and when the challenged
proof might bring out, upon discussion, other evils. These, you will
allow, are severe constructions; but every thing his enemies say of him
cannot be false.

I will proceed by-and-by.


***


Sometimes we have both thought him one of the most undesigning merely
witty men we ever knew; at other times one of the deepest creatures
we ever conversed with. So that when in one visit we have imagined
we fathomed him, in the next he has made us ready to give him up as
impenetrable. This impenetrableness, my dear, is to be put among the
shades in his character. Yet, upon the whole, you have been so far
of his party, that you have contested that his principal fault is
over-frankness, and too much regardlessness of appearances, and that he
is too giddy to be very artful: you would have it, that at the time he
says any thing good, he means what he speaks; that his variableness and
levity are constitutional, owing to sound health, and to a soul and body
[that was your observation] fitted for and pleased with each other. And
hence you concluded, that could this consentaneousness [as you call it]
of corporal and animal faculties be pointed by discretion; that is
to say, could his vivacity be confined within the pale of but moral
obligations, he would be far from being rejectable as a companion for
life.

But I used then to say, and I still am of opinion, that he wants
a heart: and if he does, he wants every thing. A wrong head may be
convinced, may have a right turn given it: but who is able to give a
heart, if a heart be wanting? Divine Grace, working a miracle, or next
to a miracle, can only change a bad heart. Should not one fly the man
who is but suspected of such a one? What, O what, do parents do, when
they endeavour to force a child's inclination, but make her think better
than otherwise she would think of a man obnoxious to themselves, and
perhaps whose character will not stand examination?

I have said, that I think Mr. Lovelace a vindictive man: upon my word, I
have sometimes doubted, whether his perseverance in his addresses to
me has not been the more obstinate, since he has found himself so
disagreeable to my friends. From that time I verily think he has
been the more fervent in them; yet courts them not, but sets them at
defiance. For this indeed he pleads disinterestedness [I am sure he
cannot politeness]; and the more plausibly, as he is apprized of the
ability they have to make it worth his while to court them. 'Tis true
he has declared, and with too much reason, (or there would be no bearing
him,) that the lowest submissions on his part would not be accepted; and
to oblige me, has offered to seek a reconciliation with them, if I would
give him hope of success.

As to his behaviour at church, the Sunday before last, I lay no stress
upon that, because I doubt there was too much outward pride in his
intentional humility, or Shorey, who is not his enemy, could not have
mistaken it.

I do not think him so deeply learned in human nature, or in ethics, as
some have thought him. Don't you remember how he stared at the following
trite observations, which every moralist could have furnished him with?
Complaining as he did, in a half-menacing strain, of the obloquies
raised against him--'That if he were innocent, he should despise the
obloquy: if not, revenge would not wipe off his guilt.' 'That nobody
ever thought of turning a sword into a sponge!' 'That it was in his own
power by reformation of an error laid to his charge by an enemy, to make
that enemy one of his best friends; and (which was the noblest revenge
in the world) against his will; since an enemy would not wish him to be
without the faults he taxed him with.'

But the intention, he said, was the wound.

How so, I asked him, when that cannot wound without the application?
'That the adversary only held the sword: he himself pointed it to his
breast:--And why should he mortally resent that malice, which he might
be the better for as long as he lived?'--What could be the reading
he has been said to be master of, to wonder, as he did, at these
observations?

But, indeed, he must take pleasure in revenge; and yet holds others to
be inexcusable for the same fault. He is not, however, the only one
who can see how truly blamable those errors are in another, which they
hardly think such in themselves.

From these considerations, from these over-balances, it was, that I
said, in a former, that I would not be in love with this man for the
world: and it was going further than prudence would warrant, when I was
for compounding with you, by the words conditional liking, which you so
humourously rally.

Well but, methinks you say, what is all this to the purpose? This is
still but reasoning: but, if you are in love, you are: and love,
like the vapours, is the deeper rooted for having no sufficient cause
assignable for its hold. And so you call upon me again to have no
reserves, and so-forth.

Why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think, that, with all his
preponderating faults, I like him better than I ever thought I should
like him; and, those faults considered, better perhaps than I ought to
like him. And I believe, it is possible for the persecution I labour
under to induce me to like him still more--especially while I can
recollect to his advantage our last interview, and as every day produces
stronger instances of tyranny, I will call it, on the other side.--In
a word, I will frankly own (since you cannot think any thing I say too
explicit) that were he now but a moral man, I would prefer him to all
the men I ever saw.

So that this is but conditional liking still, you'll say: nor, I hope,
is it more. I never was in love as it is called; and whether this be it,
or not, I must submit to you. But will venture to think it, if it be,
no such mighty monarch, no such unconquerable power, as I have heard
it represented; and it must have met with greater encouragement than
I think I have given it, to be absolutely unconquerable--since I am
persuaded, that I could yet, without a throb, most willingly give up the
one man to get rid of the other.

But now to be a little more serious with you: if, my dear, my
particularly-unhappy situation had driven (or led me, if you please)
into a liking of the man; and if that liking had, in your opinion,
inclined me to love him, should you, whose mind is susceptible of the
most friendly impressions, who have such high notions of the delicacy
which ought to be observed by our sex in these matters, and who actually
do enter so deeply into the distresses of one you love--should you
have pushed so far that unhappy friend on so very nice a
subject?--Especially, when I aimed not (as you could prove by fifty
instances, it seems) to guard against being found out. Had you rallied
me by word of mouth in the manner you do, it might have been more in
character; especially, if your friend's distresses had been surmounted,
and if she had affected prudish airs in revolving the subject: but to
sit down to write it, as methinks I see you, with a gladdened eye, and
with all the archness of exultation--indeed, my dear, (and I take notice
of it, rather for the sake of your own generosity, than for my sake,
for, as I have said, I love your raillery,) it is not so very pretty;
the delicacy of the subject, and the delicacy of your own mind,
considered.

I lay down my pen here, that you may consider of it a little, if you
please.


***


I resume, to give you my opinion of the force which figure or person
ought to have upon our sex: and this I shall do both generally as to the
other sex, and particularly as to this man; whence you will be able to
collect how far my friends are in the right, or in the wrong, when
they attribute a good deal of prejudice in favour of one man, and in
disfavour of the other, on the score of figure. But, first, let me
observe, that they see abundant reason, on comparing Mr. Lovelace and
Mr. Solmes together, to believe that this may be a consideration with
me; and therefore they believe it is.

There is certainly something very plausible and attractive, as well
as creditable to a woman's choice, in figure. It gives a favourable
impression at first sight, in which we wish to be confirmed: and if,
upon further acquaintance, we find reason to be so, we are pleased with
our judgment, and like the person the better, for having given us cause
to compliment our own sagacity, in our first-sighted impressions. But,
nevertheless, it has been generally a rule with me, to suspect a fine
figure, both in man and woman; and I have had a good deal of reason
to approve my rule;--with regard to men especially, who ought to value
themselves rather upon their intellectual than personal qualities.
For, as to our sex, if a fine woman should be led by the opinion of the
world, to be vain and conceited upon her form and features; and that to
such a degree, as to have neglected the more material and more durable
recommendations, the world will be ready to excuse her; since a pretty
fool, in all she says, and in all she does, will please, we know not
why.

But who would grudge this pretty fool her short day! Since, with her
summer's sun, when her butterfly flutters are over, and the winter
of age and furrows arrives, she will feel the just effects of having
neglected to cultivate her better faculties: for then, lie another
Helen, she will be unable to bear the reflection even of her own glass,
and being sunk into the insignificance of a mere old woman, she will
be entitled to the contempts which follow that character. While the
discreet matron, who carries up [we will not, in such a one's case,
say down] into advanced life, the ever-amiable character of virtuous
prudence and useful experience, finds solid veneration take place of
airy admiration, and more than supply the want of it.

But for a man to be vain of his person, how effeminate! If such a
one happens to have genius, it seldom strikes deep into intellectual
subjects. His outside usually runs away with him. To adorn, and perhaps,
intending to adorn, to render ridiculous that person, takes up all his
attention. All he does is personal; that is to say, for himself: all he
admires, is himself: and in spite of the correction of the stage, which
so often and so justly exposes a coxcomb, he usually dwindles down, and
sinks into that character; and, of consequence, becomes the scorn of one
sex, and the jest of the other.

This is generally the case of your fine figures of men, and of those who
value themselves on dress and outward appearance: whence it is, that I
repeat, that mere person in a man is a despicable consideration. But
if a man, besides figure, has learning, and such talents as would have
distinguished him, whatever were his form, then indeed person is an
addition: and if he has not run too egregiously into self-admiration,
and if he has preserved his morals, he is truly a valuable being.

Mr. Lovelace has certainly taste; and, as far as I am able to determine,
he has judgment in most of the politer arts. But although he has a
humourous way of carrying it off, yet one may see that he values himself
not a little, both on his person and his parts, and even upon his dress;
and yet he has so happy an ease in the latter, that it seems to be the
least part of his study. And as to the former, I should hold myself
inexcusable, if I were to add to his vanity by shewing the least regard
for what is too evidently so much his.

And now, my dear, let me ask you, Have I come up to your expectation? If
I have not, when my mind is more at ease, I will endeavour to please
you better. For, methinks, my sentences drag, my style creeps, my
imagination is sunk, my spirits serve me not, only to tell you, that
whether I have more or less, I am wholly devoted to the commands of my
dear Miss Howe.



P.S. The insolent Betty Barnes has just now fired me anew, by reporting
to me the following expressions of the hideous creature, Solmes--'That
he is sure of the coy girl; and that with little labour to himself. That
be I ever so averse to him beforehand, he can depend upon my principles;
and it will be a pleasure to him to see by what pretty degrees I shall
come to.' [Horrid wretch!] 'That it was Sir Oliver's observation, who
knew the world perfectly well, that fear was a better security than
love, for a woman's good behaviour to her husband; although, for his
part, to such a fine creature [truly] he would try what love would do,
for a few weeks at least; being unwilling to believe what the old knight
used to aver, that fondness spoils more wives than it makes good.'

What think you, my dear, of such a wretch as this! tutored, too, by that
old surly misogynist, as he was deemed, Sir Oliver?--




LETTER XLI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 21.


How willingly would my dear mother shew kindness to me, were she
permitted! None of this persecution should I labour under, I am sure, if
that regard were paid to her prudence and fine understanding, which they
so well deserve. Whether owing to her, or to my aunt, or to both, that
a new trial was to be made upon me, I cannot tell, but this morning her
Shorey delivered into my hand the following condescending letter.


MY DEAR GIRL,

For so I must still call you; since dear you may be to me, in every
sense of the word--we have taken into particular consideration some
hints that fell yesterday from your good Norton, as if we had not, at
Mr. Solmes's first application, treated you with that condescension,
wherewith we have in all other instances treated you. If it even had
been so, my dear, you were not excusable to be wanting in your part,
and to set yourself to oppose your father's will in a point which he had
entered too far, to recede with honour. But all yet may be well. On your
single will, my child, depends all our happiness.

Your father permits me to tell you, that if you now at last comply with
his expectations, all past disobligations shall be buried in oblivion,
as if they had never been: but withal, that this is the last time that
that grace will be offered you.

I hinted to you, you must remember,* that patterns of the richest silks
were sent for. They are come. And as they are come, your father, to shew
how much he is determined, will have me send them up to you. I could
have wished they might not have accompanied this letter, but there is
not great matter in that. I must tell you, that your delicacy is not
quite so much regarded as I had once thought it deserved to be.


     * See Letter XX.


These are the newest, as well as richest, that we could procure;
answerable to our situation in the world; answerable to the fortune,
additional to your grandfather's estate, designed you; and to the noble
settlements agreed upon.

Your father intends you six suits (three of them dressed suits) at his
own expense. You have an entire new suit; and one besides, which I think
you never wore but twice. As the new suit is rich, if you choose to
make that one of the six, your father will present you with an hundred
guineas in lieu.

Mr. Solmes intends to present you with a set of jewels. As you have your
grandmother's and your own, if you choose to have the former new set,
and to make them serve, his present will be made in money; a very round
sum--which will be given in full property to yourself; besides a fine
annual allowance for pin-money, as it is called. So that your objection
against the spirit of a man you think worse of than it deserves, will
have no weight; but you will be more independent than a wife of less
discretion than we attribute to you, perhaps ought to be. You know full
well, that I, who first and last brought a still larger fortune into the
family than you will carry to Mr. Solmes, had not a provision made me
of near this that we have made for you.--Where people marry to their
liking, terms are the least things stood upon--yet should I be sorry if
you cannot (to oblige us all) overcome a dislike.

Wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly and freely upon
this subject. Your behaviour hitherto has been such, that we have had no
opportunity of entering minutely into the subject with you. Yet, after
all that has passed between you and me in conversation, and between you
and your uncles by letter, you have no room to doubt what is to be the
consequence.--Either, child, we must give up our authority, or you your
humour. You cannot expect the one. We have all the reason in the world
to expect the other. You know I have told you more than once, that
you must resolve to have Mr. Solmes, or never to be looked upon as our
child.

The draught of the settlement you may see whenever you will. We think
there can be no room for objection to any of the articles. There is
still more in them in our family's favour, than was stipulated at first,
when your aunt talked of them to you. More so, indeed, than we
could have asked. If, upon perusal of them, you think any alteration
necessary, it shall be made.--Do, my dear girl, send to me within this
day or two, or rather ask me, for the perusal of them.

As a certain person's appearance at church so lately, and what he gives
out every where, makes us extremely uneasy, and as that uneasiness will
continue while you are single, you must not wonder that a short day
is intended. This day fortnight we design it to be, if you have no
objection to make that I shall approve of. But if you determine as we
would have you, and signify it to us, we shall not stand with you for a
week or so.

Your sightlines of person may perhaps make some think this alliance
disparaging. But I hope you will not put such a personal value upon
yourself: if you do, it will indeed be the less wonder that person
should weigh with you (however weak the consideration!) in another man.

Thus we parents, in justice, ought to judge: that our two daughters are
equally dear and valuable to us: if so, why should Clarissa think that
a disparagement, which Arabella would not (nor we for her) have thought
any, had the address been made to her?--You will know what I mean by
this, without my explaining myself farther.

Signify to us, now, therefore, your compliance with our wishes. And then
there is an end of your confinement. An act of oblivion, as I may call
it, shall pass upon all your former refractoriness: and you will once
more make us happy in you, and in one another. You may, in this case,
directly come down to your father and me, in his study; where we will
give you our opinions of the patterns, with our hearty forgiveness and
blessings.

Come, be a good child, as you used to be, my Clarissa. I have
(notwithstanding your past behaviour, and the hopelessness which some
have expressed in your compliance) undertaken this one time more for
you. Discredit not my hopes, my dear girl. I have promised never more
to interfere between your father and you, if this my most earnest
application succeed not. I expect you down, love. Your father expects
you down. But be sure don't let him see any thing uncheerful in your
compliance. If you come, I will clasp you to my fond heart, with as much
pleasure as ever I pressed you to it in my whole life. You don't know
what I have suffered within these few weeks past; nor ever will be able
to guess, till you come to be in my situation; which is that of a fond
and indulgent mother, praying night and day, and struggling to preserve,
against the attempts of more ungovernable spirits, the peace and union
of her family.

But you know the terms. Come not near us, if you have resolve to be
undutiful: but this, after what I have written, I hope you cannot be.

If you come directly, and, as I have said, cheerfully, as if your heart
were in your duty, (and you told me it was free, you know,) I shall
then, as I said, give you the most tender proofs how much I am

Your truly affectionate Mother.


***


Think for me, my dearest friend, how I must be affected by this letter;
the contents of it is so surprisingly terrifying, yet so sweetly
urged!--O why, cried I to myself, am I obliged to undergo this
severe conflict between a command that I cannot obey, and language so
condescendingly moving!--Could I have been sure of being struck dead
at the alter before the ceremony had given the man I hate a title to my
vows, I think I could have submitted to having been led to it. But to
think of living with and living for a man one abhors, what a sad thing
is that!

And then, how could the glare of habit and ornament be supposed any
inducement to one, who has always held, that the principal view of a
good wife in the adorning of her person, ought to be, to preserve the
affection of her husband, and to do credit to his choice; and that she
should be even fearful of attracting the eyes of others?--In this view,
must not the very richness of the patterns add to my disgusts?--Great
encouragement, indeed, to think of adorning one's self to be the wife of
Mr. Solmes!

Upon the whole, it was not possible for me to go down upon the
prescribed condition. Do you think it was?--And to write, if my letter
would have been read, what could I write that would be admitted, and
after what I had written and said to so little effect?

I walked backward and forward. I threw down with disdain the patterns.
Now to my closet retired I; then quitting it, threw myself upon the
settee; then upon this chair, then upon that; then into one window, then
into another--I knew not what to do!--And while I was in this suspense,
having again taken up the letter to re-peruse it, Betty came in,
reminding me, by order, that my papa and mamma waited for me in my
father's study.

Tell my mamma, said I, that I beg the favour of seeing her here for one
moment, or to permit me to attend her any where by herself.

I listened at the stairs-head--You see, my dear, how it is, cried
my father, very angrily: all your condescension (as your indulgence
heretofore) is thrown away. You blame your son's violence, as you call
it [I had some pleasure in hearing this]; but nothing else will do with
her. You shall not see her alone. Is my presence an exception to the
bold creature?

Tell her, said my mother to Betty, she knows upon what terms she may
come down to us. Nor will I see her upon any other.

The maid brought me this answer. I had recourse to my pen and ink; but
I trembled so, that I could not write, nor knew what to say, had I
steadier fingers. At last Betty brought me these lines from my father.


UNDUTIFUL AND PERVERSE CLARISSA,

No condescension, I see, will move you. Your mother shall not see you;
nor will I. Prepare however to obey. You know our pleasure. Your uncle
Antony, your brother, and your sister, and your favourite Mrs. Norton,
shall see the ceremony performed privately at your uncle's chapel. And
when Mr. Solmes can introduce you to us, in the temper we wish to behold
you in, we may perhaps forgive his wife, although we never can, in
any other character, our perverse daughter. As it will be so privately
performed, clothes and equipage may be provided for afterwards. So
prepare to go to your uncle's for an early day in next week. We will not
see you till all is over: and we will have it over the sooner, in order
to shorten the time of your deserved confinement, and our own trouble in
contending with such a rebel, as you have been of late. I will hear no
pleas, I will receive no letter, nor expostulation. Nor shall you hear
from me any more till you have changed your name to my liking. This from

Your incensed Father.


If this resolution be adhered to, then will my father never see me
more!--For I will never be the wife of that Solmes--I will die first--!


TUESDAY EVENING.


He, this Solmes, came hither soon after I had received my father's
letter. He sent up to beg leave to wait upon me--I wonder at his
assurance--!

I said to Betty, who brought me this message, let him restore an unhappy
creature to her father and mother, and then I may hear what he has to
say. But, if my friends will not see me on his account, I will not see
him upon his own.

I hope, Miss, said Betty, you will not send me down with this answer. He
is with you papa and mamma.

I am driven to despair, said I. I cannot be used worse. I will not see
him.

Down she went with my answer. She pretended, it seems, to be loth to
repeat it: so was commanded out of her affected reserves, and gave it in
its full force.

O how I heard my father storm!

They were altogether, it seems, in his study. My brother was for
having me turned out of the house that moment, to Lovelace, and my evil
destiny. My mother was pleased to put in a gentle word for me: I know
not what it was: but thus she was answered--My dear, this is the most
provoking thing in the world in a woman of your good sense!--To love a
rebel, as well as if she were dutiful. What encouragement for duty
is this?--Have I not loved her as well as ever you did? And why am I
changed! Would to the Lord, your sex knew how to distinguish! It is
plain, that she relies upon her power over you. The fond mother ever
made a hardened child!

She was pleased, however, to blame Betty, as the wench owned, for giving
my answer its full force. But my father praised her for it.

The wench says, that he would have come up in his wrath, at my refusing
to see Mr. Solmes, had not my brother and sister prevailed upon him to
the contrary.

I wish he had!--And, were it not for his own sake, that he had killed
me!

Mr. Solmes condescended [I am mightily obliged to him truly!] to plead
for me.

They are all in tumults! How it will end, I know not--I am quite weary
of life--So happy, till within these few weeks!--So miserable now!

Well, indeed, might my mother say, that I should have severe trials.*


* See Letter XXV.


P.S. The idiot [such a one am I treated like!] is begged, as I may say,
by my brother and sister. They have desired, that I may be consigned
over entirely to their management. If it be granted, [it is granted,
on my father's part, I understand, but not yet on my mother's,] what
cruelty may I not expect from their envy, jealousy, and ill-will!--I
shall soon see, by its effects, if I am to be so consigned. This is a
written intimation privately dropt in my wood-house walk, by my cousin
Dolly Hervey. The dear girl longs to see me, she tells me: but is
forbidden till she see me as Mrs. Solmes, or as consenting to be his. I
will take example by their perseverance!--Indeed I will--!




LETTER XLII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


An angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, has passed between my sister
and me. Did you think I could scold, my dear?

She was sent up to me, upon my refusal to see Mr. Solmes--let loose
upon me, I think!--No intention on their parts to conciliate! It seems
evident that I am given up to my brother and her, by general consent.

I will do justice to every thing she said against me, which carried any
force with it. As I ask for your approbation or disapprobation of my
conduct, upon the facts I lay before you, I should think it the sign of
a very bad cause, if I endeavoured to mislead my judge.

She began with representing to me the danger I had been in, had my
father come up, as he would have done had he not been hindered--by
Mr. Solmes, among the rest. She reflected upon my Norton, as if she
encouraged me in my perverseness. She ridiculed me for my supposed
esteem for Mr. Lovelace--was surprised that the witty, the prudent, nay,
the dutiful and pi--ous [so she sneeringly pronounced the word] Clarissa
Harlowe, should be so strangely fond of a profligate man, that her
parents were forced to lock her up, in order to hinder her from running
into his arms. 'Let me ask you, my dear, said she, how you now keep
your account of the disposition of your time? How many hours in the
twenty-four do you devote to your needle? How many to your prayers?
How many to letter-writing? And how many to love?--I doubt, I doubt, my
little dear, was her arch expression, the latter article is like Aaron's
rod, and swallows up the rest!--Tell me; is it not so?'

To these I answered, That it was a double mortification to me to owe
my safety from the effects of my father's indignation to a man I could
never thank for any thing. I vindicated the good Mrs. Norton with a
warmth that was due to her merit. With equal warmth I resented her
reflections upon me on Mr. Lovelace's account. As to the disposition of
my time in the twenty-four hours, I told her it would better have become
her to pity a sister in distress, than to exult over her--especially,
when I could too justly attribute to the disposition of some of her
wakeful hours no small part of that distress.

She raved extremely at this last hint: but reminded me of the gentle
treatment of all my friends, my mother's in particular, before it
came to this. She said, that I had discovered a spirit they never had
expected: that, if they had thought me such a championess, they would
hardly have ventured to engage with me: but that now, the short and the
long of it was, that the matter had gone too far to be given up: that it
was become a contention between duty and willfulness; whether a parent's
authority were to yield to a daughter's obstinacy, or the contrary: that
I must therefore bend or break, that was all, child.

I told her, that I wished the subject were of such a nature, that I
could return her pleasantry with equal lightness of heart: but that, if
Mr. Solmes had such merit in every body's eyes, in hers, particularly,
why might he not be a brother to me, rather than a husband?

O child, says she, methinks you are as pleasant to the full as I am:
I begin to have some hopes of you now. But do you think I will rob my
sister of her humble servant? Had he first addressed himself to me,
proceeded she, something might have been said: but to take my younger
sister's refusal! No, no, child; it is not come to that neither!
Besides, that would be to leave the door open in your heart for you know
who, child; and we would fain bar him out, if possible. In short [and
then she changed both her tone and her looks] had I been as forward
as somebody, to throw myself into the arms of one of the greatest
profligates in England, who had endeavoured to support his claim to me
through the blood of my brother, then might all my family join together
to save me from such a wretch, and to marry me as fast as they could,
to some worthy man, who might opportunely offer himself. And now, Clary,
all's out, and make the most of it.

Did not this deserve a severe return? Do, say it did, to justify my
reply.--Alas! for my poor sister! said I--The man was not always so
great a profligate. How true is the observation, That unrequited love
turns to deepest hate!

I thought she would beat me. But I proceeded--I have heard often of my
brother's danger, and my brother's murderer. When so little ceremony is
made with me, why should I not speak out?--Did he not seek to kill the
other, if he could have done it? Would my brother have given Lovelace
his life, had it been in his power?--The aggressor should not
complain.--And, as to opportune offers, would to Heaven some one
had offered opportunely to somebody! It is not my fault, Bella, the
opportune gentleman don't come!

Could you, my dear, have shewn more spirit? I expected to feel the
weight of her hand. She did come up to me, with it held up: then,
speechless with passion, ran half way down the stairs, and came up
again.

When she could speak--God give me patience with you!

Amen, said I: but you see, Bella, how ill you bear the retort you
provoke. Will you forgive me; and let me find a sister in you, as I am
sorry, if you had reason to think me unsisterly in what I have said?

Then did she pour upon me, with greater violence; considering my
gentleness as a triumph of temper over her. She was resolved, she said,
to let every body know how I took the wicked Lovelace's part against my
brother.

I wished, I told her, I could make the plea for myself, which she
might for herself; to wit, that my anger was more inexcusable than my
judgment. But I presumed she had some other view in coming to me, than
she had hitherto acquainted me with. Let me, said I, but know (after
all that has passed) if you have any thing to propose that I can comply
with; any thing that can make my only sister once more my friend?

I had before, upon hearing her ridiculing me on my supposed character of
meekness, said, that, although I wished to be thought meek, I would not
be abject; although humble not mean: and here, in a sneering way, she
cautioned me on that head.

I replied, that her pleasantry was much more agreeable than her anger.
But I wished she would let me know the end of a visit that had hitherto
(between us) been so unsisterly.

She desired to be informed, in the name of every body, was her word,
what I was determined upon? And whether to comply or not?--One word for
all: My friends were not to have patience with so perverse a creature
for ever.

This then I told her I would do: Absolutely break with the man they were
all so determined against: upon condition, however, that neither Mr.
Solmes, nor any other, were urged upon me with the force of a command.

And what was this, more than I had offered before? What, but ringing
my changes upon the same bells, and neither receding nor advancing one
tittle?

If I knew what other proposals I could make, I told her, that would
be acceptable to them all, and free me from the address of a man so
disagreeable to me, I would make them. I had indeed before offered,
never to marry without my father's consent--

She interrupted me, That was because I depended upon my whining tricks
to bring my father and mother to what I pleased.

A poor dependence! I said:--She knew those who would make that
dependence vain--

And I should have brought them to my own beck, very probably, and my
uncle Harlowe too, as also my aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden from
their sight, and thereby hindered from playing my pug's tricks before
them.

At least, Bella, said I, you have hinted to me to whom I am obliged,
that my father and mother, and every body else, treat me thus harshly.
But surely you make them all very weak. Indifferent persons, judging of
us two from what you say, would either think me a very artful creature,
or you a very spiteful one--

You are indeed a very artful one, for that matter, interrupted she in
a passion: one of the artfullest I ever knew! And then followed an
accusation so low! so unsisterly!--That I half-bewitched people by my
insinuating address: that nobody could be valued or respected, but must
stand like ciphers wherever I came. How often, said she, have I and my
brother been talking upon a subject, and had every body's attention,
till you came in, with your bewitching meek pride, and humble
significance? And then have we either been stopped by references to Miss
Clary's opinion, forsooth; or been forced to stop ourselves, or must
have talked on unattended to by every body.

She paused. Dear Bella, proceed!

She indeed seemed only gathering breath.

And so I will, said she--Did you not bewitch my grandfather? Could any
thing be pleasing to him, that you did not say or do? How did he use
to hang, till he slabbered again, poor doting old man! on your silver
tongue! Yet what did you say, that we could not have said? What did you
do, that we did not endeavour to do?--And what was all this for? Why,
truly, his last will shewed what effect your smooth obligingness had
upon him!--To leave the acquired part of his estate from the next heirs,
his own sons, to a grandchild; to his youngest grandchild! A daughter
too!--To leave the family-pictures from his sons to you, because you
could tiddle about them, and, though you now neglect their examples,
could wipe and clean them with your dainty hands! The family-plate too,
in such quantities, of two or three generations standing, must not be
changed, because his precious child,* humouring his old fal-lal taste,
admired it, to make it all her own.


     * Alluding to his words in the preamble to the clauses in
     his will. See Letter IV.


This was too low to move me: O my poor sister! said I: not to be able,
or at least willing, to distinguish between art and nature! If I did
oblige, I was happy in it: I looked for no further reward: my mind is
above art, from the dirty motives you mention. I wish with all my heart
my grandfather had not thus distinguished me; he saw my brother likely
to be amply provided for out of the family, as well as in it: he desired
that you might have the greater share of my father's favour for it;
and no doubt but you both have. You know, Bella, that the estate my
grandfather bequeathed me was not half the real estate he left.

What's all that to an estate in possession, and left you with such
distinctions, as gave you a reputation of greater value than the estate
itself?

Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your envy, I doubt!--But have I not given
up that possession in the best manner I could--

Yes, interrupting me, she hated me for that best manner. Specious little
witch! she called me: your best manner, so full of art and design, had
never been seen through, if you, with your blandishing ways, have not
been put out of sight, and reduced to positive declarations!--Hindered
from playing your little declarations!--Hindered from playing your
little whining tricks! curling, like a serpent about your mamma; and
making her cry to deny you any thing your little obstinate heart was set
upon--!

Obstinate heart, Bella!

Yes, obstinate heart! For did you ever give up any thing? Had you not
the art to make them think all was right you asked, though my brother
and I were frequently refused favours of no greater import!

I know not, Bella, that I ever asked any thing unfit to be granted. I
seldom asked favours for myself, but for others.

I was a reflecting creature for this.

All you speak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I cannot go so far back
into our childish follies. Little did I think of how long standing your
late-shewn antipathy is.

I was a reflector again! Such a saucy meekness; such a best manner; and
such venom in words!--O Clary! Clary! Thou wert always a two-faced girl!

Nobody thought I had two faces, when I gave up all into my father's
management; taking from his bounty, as before, all my little
pocket-money, without a shilling addition to my stipend, or desiring
it--

Yes, cunning creature!--And that was another of your fetches!--For did
it not engage my fond father (as no doubt you thought it would) to tell
you, that since you had done so grateful and dutiful a thing, he would
keep entire, for your use, all the produce of the estate left you, and
be but your steward in it; and that you should be entitled to the same
allowances as before? Another of your hook-in's, Clary!--So that all
your extravagancies have been supported gratis.

My extravagancies, Bella!--But did my father ever give me any thing he
did not give you?

Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I should have had the
conscience to ask. But I have still the greater part to shew! But you!
What have you to shew?--I dare say, not fifty pieces in the world!

Indeed I have not!

I believe you!--Your mamma Norton, I suppose--But mum for that--!

Unworthy Bella! The good woman, although low in circumstance, is great
in mind! Much greater than those who would impute meanness to a soul
incapable of it.

What then have you done with the sums given you from infancy to
squander?--Let me ask you [affecting archness], Has, has, has Lovelace,
has your rake, put it out at interest for you?

O that my sister would not make me blush for her! It is, however, out at
interest!--And I hope it will bring me interest upon interest!--Better
than to lie useless in my cabinet.

She understood me, she said. Were I a man, she should suppose I was
aiming to carry the county--Popularity! A crowd to follow me with their
blessings as I went to and from church, and nobody else to be regarded,
were agreeable things. House-top-proclamations! I hid not my light under
a bushel, she would say that for me. But was it not a little hard upon
me, to be kept from blazing on a Sunday?--And to be hindered from my
charitable ostentations?

This, indeed, Bella, is cruel in you, who have so largely contributed to
my confinement.--But go on. You'll be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot
wish to be able to return this usage.--Poor Bella! And I believe I
smiled a little too contemptuously for a sister to a sister.

None of your saucy contempts [rising in her voice]: None of your poor
Bella's, with that air of superiority in a younger sister!

Well then, rich Bella! courtesying--that will please you better--and it
is due likewise to the hoards you boast of.

Look ye, Clary, holding up her hand, if you are not a little more abject
in your meekness, a little more mean in your humility, and treat me with
the respect due to an elder sister--you shall find--

Not that you will treat me worse than you have done, Bella!--That cannot
be; unless you were to let fall your uplifted hand upon me--and that
would less become you to do, than me to bear.

Good, meek creature:--But you were upon your overtures just now!--I
shall surprise every body by tarrying so long. They will think some good
may be done with you--and supper will be ready.

A tear would stray down my cheek--How happy have I been, said I,
sighing, in the supper-time conversations, with all my dear friends in
my eye round their hospitable board.

I met only with insult for this--Bella has not a feeling heart. The
highest joy in this life she is not capable of: but then she saves
herself many griefs, by her impenetrableness--yet, for ten times the
pain that such a sensibility is attended with, would I not part with the
pleasure it brings with it.

She asked me, upon my turning from her, if she should not say any thing
below of my compliances?

You may say, that I will do every thing they would have me do, if they
will free me from Mr. Solmes's address.

This is all you desire at present, creeper on! insinuator! [What words
she has!] But will not t'other man flame out, and roar most horribly,
upon the snatching from his paws a prey he thought himself sure of?

I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall never come to a point.
I shall not matter in his roaring, as you call it. I will promise him,
that, if I ever marry any other man, it shall not be till he is married.
And if he be not satisfied with such a condescension, I shall think he
ought: and I will give any assurances, that I will neither correspond
with him, nor see him. Surely this will do.

But I suppose then you will have no objection to see and converse, on a
civil footing, with Mr. Solmes--as your father's friend, or so?

No! I must be permitted to retire to my apartment whenever he comes.
I would no more converse with the one, than correspond with the other.
That would be to make Mr. Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on a belief,
that I broke with him, to have Mr. Solmes.

And so, that wicked wretch is to be allowed such a controul over you,
that you are not to be civil to your father's friends, at his own house,
for fear of incensing him!--When this comes to be represented, be so
good as to tell me, what is it you expect from it!

Every thing, I said, or nothing, as she was pleased to represent it.--Be
so good as to give it your interest, Bella, and say, further, 'That
I will by any means I can, in the law or otherwise, make over to my
father, to my uncles, or even to my brother, all I am entitled to by my
grandfather's will, as a security for the performance of my promises.
And as I shall have no reason to expect any favour from my father, if I
break them, I shall not be worth any body's having. And further
still, unkindly as my brother has used me, I will go down to Scotland
privately, as his housekeeper [I now see I may be spared here] if he
will promise to treat me no worse than he would do an hired one.--Or
I will go to Florence, to my cousin Morden, if his stay in Italy will
admit of it. In either case, it may be given out, that I am gone to the
other; or to the world's end. I care not whither it is said I am gone,
or do go.'

Let me ask you, child, if you will give your pretty proposal in writing?

Yes, with all my heart. And I stepped to my closet, and wrote to the
purpose I have mentioned; and moreover, the following lines to my
brother.


MY DEAR BROTHER,

I hope I have made such proposals to my sister as will be accepted. I am
sure they will, if you please to give them your sanction. Let me beg
of you, for God's sake, that you will. I think myself very unhappy in
having incurred your displeasure. No sister can love a brother better
than I love you. Pray do not put the worst but the best constructions
upon my proposals, when you have them reported to you. Indeed I mean the
best. I have no subterfuges, no arts, no intentions, but to keep to the
letter of them. You shall yourself draw up every thing into writing, as
strong as you can, and I will sign it: and what the law will not do to
enforce it, my resolution and my will shall: so that I shall be worth
nobody's address, that has not my papa's consent: nor shall any person,
nor any consideration, induce me to revoke it. You can do more than any
body to reconcile my parents and uncles to me. Let me owe this desirable
favour to your brotherly interposition, and you will for ever oblige

Your afflicted Sister, CL. HARLOWE.


***


And how do you think Bella employed herself while I was writing?--Why,
playing gently upon my harpsichord; and humming to it, to shew her
unconcernedness.

When I approached her with what I had written, she arose with an air
of levity--Why, love, you have not written already!--You have, I
protest!--O what a ready penwoman!--And may I read it?

If you please. And let me beseech you, my dear Bella, to back these
proposals with your good offices: and [folding my uplifted hands; tears,
I believe, standing in my eyes] I will love you as never sister loved
another.

Thou art a strange creature, said she; there is no withstanding thee.

She took the proposals and letter; and having read them, burst into an
affected laugh: How wise ones may be taken in!--Then you did not know,
that I was jesting with you all this time!--And so you would have me
carry down this pretty piece of nonsense?

Don't let me be surprised at your seeming unsisterliness, Bella. I hope
it is but seeming. There can be no wit in such jesting as this.

The folly of the creature!--How natural is it for people, when they set
their hearts upon any thing, to think every body must see with their
eyes!--Pray, dear child, what becomes of your father's authority
here?--Who stoops here, the parent, or the child?--How does this square
with engagements actually agreed upon between your father and Mr.
Solmes? What security, that your rake will not follow you to the world's
end?--Nevertheless, that you may not think that I stand in the way of
a reconciliation on such fine terms as these, I will be your messenger
this once, and hear what my papa will say to it; although beforehand I
can tell you, these proposals will not answer the principal end.

So down she went. But, it seems, my aunt Hervey and my uncle Harlowe
were not gone away: and as they have all engaged to act in concert,
messengers were dispatched to my uncle and aunt to desire them to be
there to breakfast in the morning.


MONDAY NIGHT, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.


I am afraid I shall not be thought worthy--

Just as I began to fear I should not be thought worthy of an answer,
Betty rapped at my door, and said, if I were not in bed, she had a
letter for me. I had but just done writing the above dialogue, and stept
to the door with the pen in my hand--Always writing, Miss! said the
bold wench: it is admirable how you can get away what you write--but the
fairies, they say, are always at hand to help lovers.--She retired in
so much haste, that, had I been disposed, I could not take the notice of
this insolence which it deserved.

I enclose my brother's letter. He was resolved to let me see, that I
should have nothing to expect from his kindness. But surely he will
not be permitted to carry every point. The assembling of my friends
to-morrow is a good sign: and I will hope something from that, and from
proposals so reasonable. And now I will try if any repose will fall to
my lot for the remainder of this night.


TO MISS CLARY HARLOWE [ENCLOSED IN THE PRECEDING.]

Your proposals will be considered by your father and mother, and
all your friends, to-morrow morning. What trouble does your shameful
forwardness give us all! I wonder you have the courage to write to me,
upon whom you are so continually emptying your whole female quiver. I
have no patience with you, for reflecting upon me as the aggressor in a
quarrel which owed its beginning to my consideration for you.

You have made such confessions in a villain's favour, as ought to cause
all your relations to renounce you for ever. For my part, I will
not believe any woman in the world, who promises against her avowed
inclination. To put it out of your power to ruin yourself is the only
way left to prevent your ruin. I did not intend to write; but your
too-kind sister has prevailed upon me. As to your going to Scotland,
that day of grace is over.--Nor would I advise, that you should go to
grandfather-up your cousin Morden. Besides, that worthy gentleman might
be involved in some fatal dispute, upon your account; and then be called
the aggressor.

A fine situation you have brought yourself to, to propose to hide
yourself from your rake, and to have falsehoods told, to conceal
you!--Your confinement, at this rate, is the happiest thing that could
befal you. Your bravo's behaviour at church, looking out for you, is a
sufficient indication of his power over you, had you not so shamelessly
acknowledged it.

One word for all--Your parents and uncles may do as they will: but if,
for the honour of the family, I cannot carry this point, I will retire
to Scotland, and never see the face of any one of it more.

JAMES HARLOWE.


***


There's a brother!--There's flaming duty to a father, and mother, and
uncles!--But he sees himself valued, and made of consequence; and he
gives himself airs accordingly!--Nevertheless, as I said above, I will
hope better things from those who have not the interest my brother has
to keep open these unhappy differences.




LETTER XLIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY, MARCH 21.


Would you not have thought, my dear Miss Howe, as well as I, that my
proposal must have been accepted: and that my brother, by the last
article of his unbrotherly letter (where he threatens to go to Scotland
if it should be hearkened to) was of opinion that it would.

For my part, after I had read the unkind letter over and over,
I concluded, upon the whole, that a reconciliation upon terms so
disadvantageous to myself, as hardly any other person in my case, I
dare say, would have proposed, must be the result of this morning's
conference. And in that belief I had begun to give myself new trouble in
thinking (this difficulty over) how I should be able to pacify Lovelace
on that part of my engagement, by which I undertook to break off all
correspondence with him, unless my friends should be brought, by the
interposition of his powerful friends, and any offers they might make,
(which it was rather his part to suggest, than mine to intimate,) to
change their minds.

Thus was I employed, not very agreeably, you may believe, because of the
vehemence of the tempers I had to conflict with; when breakfasting-time
approached, and my judges began to arrive.

And oh! how my heart fluttered on hearing the chariot of the one,
and then of the other, rattle through the court-yard, and the
hollow-sounding foot-step giving notice of each person's stepping out,
to take his place on the awful bench which my fancy had formed for them
and my other judges!

That, thought I, is my aunt Hervey's! That my uncle Harlowe's! Now comes
my uncle Antony! And my imagination made a fourth chariot for the odious
Solmes, although it happened he was not there.

And now, thought I, are they all assembled: and now my brother calls
upon my sister to make her report! Now the hard-hearted Bella interlards
her speech with invective! Now has she concluded her report! Now they
debate upon it!--Now does my brother flame! Now threaten to go to
Scotland! Now is he chidden, and now soothed!

And then I ran through the whole conference in my imagination, forming
speeches for this person and that, pro and con, till all concluded, as
I flattered myself, in an acceptance of my conditions, and in giving
directions to have an instrument drawn to tie me up to my good
behaviour; while I supposed all agreed to give Solmes a wife every way
more worthy of him, and with her the promise of my grandfather's estate,
in case of my forfeiture, or dying unmarried, on the righteous condition
he proposes to entitle himself to it with me.

And now, thought I, am I to be ordered down to recognize my own
proposals. And how shall I look upon my awful judges? How shall I stand
the questions of some, the set surliness of others, the returning love
of one or two? How greatly shall I be affected!

Then I wept: then I dried my eyes: then I practised at my glass for a
look more cheerful than my heart.

And now [as any thing stirred] is my sister coming to declare the issue
of all! Tears gushing again, my heart fluttering as a bird against its
wires; drying my eyes again and again to no purpose.

And thus, my Nancy, [excuse the fanciful prolixity,] was I employed, and
such were my thoughts and imaginations, when I found a very different
result from the hopeful conference.

For about ten o'clock up came my sister, with an air of cruel triumph,
waving her hand with a light flourish--

Obedience without reserve is required of you, Clary. My papa is justly
incensed, that you should presume to dispute his will, and to make
conditions with him. He knows what is best for you: and as you own
matters are gone a great way between this hated Lovelace and you,
they will believe nothing you say; except you will give the one only
instance, that will put them out of doubt of the sincerity of your
promises.

What, child, are you surprised?--Cannot you speak?--Then, it seems, you
had expected a different issue, had you?--Strange that you could!--With
all your acknowledgements and confessions, so creditable to your noted
prudence--!

I was indeed speechless for some time: my eyes were even fixed, and
ceased to flow. But upon the hard-hearted Bella's proceeding with her
airs of insult, Indeed I was mistaken, said I; indeed I was!----For in
you, Bella, I expected, I hoped for, a sister--

What! interrupted she, with all your mannerly flings, and your despising
airs, did you expect that I was capable of telling stories for you?--Did
you think, that when I was asked my own opinion of the sincerity of your
declarations, I could not tell tem, how far matters had gone between you
and your fellow?--When the intention is to bend that stubborn will of
yours to your duty, do you think I would deceive them?--Do you think I
would encourage them to call you down, to contradict all that I should
have invented in your favour?

Well, well, Bella; I am the less obliged to you; that's all. I was
willing to think that I had still a brother and sister. But I find I am
mistaken.

Pretty mopsy-eyed soul!--was her expression!--And was it willing to
think it had still a brother and sister? And why don't you go on, Clary?
[mocking my half-weeping accent] I thought I had a father, and mother,
two uncles, and an aunt: but I am mis--taken, that's all--come, Clary,
say this, and it will in part be true, because you have thrown off all
their authority, and because you respect one vile wretch more than them
all.

How have I deserved this at your hands, Sister?--But I will only say, I
pity you.

And with that disdainful air too, Clary!--None of that bridled neck!
none of your scornful pity, girl!--I beseech you!

This sort of behaviour is natural to you, surely, Bella!--What new
talents does it discover in you!--But proceed--If it be a pleasure to
you, proceed, Bella. And since I must not pity you, I will pity myself:
for nobody else will.

Because you don't, said she--

Hush, Bella, interrupting her, because I don't deserve it--I know you
were going to say so. I will say as you say in every thing; and that's
the way to please you.

Then say, Lovelace is a villain.

So I will, when I think him so.

Then you don't think him so?

Indeed I don't. You did not always, Bella.

And what, Clary, mean you by that? [bristling up to me]--Tell me what
you mean by that reflection?

Tell me why you call it a reflection?--What did I say?

Thou art a provoking creature--But what say you to two or three duels of
that wretch's?

I can't tell what to say, unless I knew the occasions.

Do you justify duelling at all?

I do not: neither can I help his duelling.

Will you go down, and humble that stubborn spirit of yours to your
mamma?

I said nothing.

Shall I conduct your Ladyship down? [offering to take my declined hand].

What! not vouchsafe to answer me?

I turned from her in silence.

What! turn your back upon me too!--Shall I bring up your mamma to you,
love? [following me, and taking my struggling hand] What? not speak yet!
Come, my sullen, silent dear, speak one word to me--you must say two
very soon to Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that.

Then [gushing into tears, which I could not hold in longer] they shall
be the last words I will ever speak.

Well, well, [insultingly wiping my averted face with her handkerchief,
while her other hand held mine, in a ridiculing tone,] I am glad any
thing will make thee speak: then you think you may be brought to speak
the two words--only they are to be the last!--How like a gentle lovyer
from its tender bleeding heart was that!

Ridiculous Bella!

Saucy Clary! [changing her sneering tone to an imperious one] But do you
think you can humble yourself to go down to your mamma?

I am tired of such stuff as this. Tell me, Bella, if my mamma will
condescend to see me?

Yes, if you can be dutiful at last.

I can. I will.

But what call you dutiful?

To give up my own inclinations--That's something more for you to tell
of--in obedience to my parents' commands; and to beg that I may not be
made miserable with a man that is fitter for any body than for me.

For me, do you mean, Clary?

Why not? since you have put the question. You have a better opinion of
him than I have. My friends, I hope, would not think him too good for
me, and not good enough for you. But cannot you tell me, Bella, what
is to become of me, without insulting over me thus?--If I must be thus
treated, remember, that if I am guilty of any rashness, the usage I meet
with will justify it.

So, Clary, you are contriving an excuse, I find, for somewhat that we
have not doubted has been in your head a great while.

If it were so, you seem resolved, for your part, and so does my brother
for his, that I shall not want one.--But indeed, Bella, I can bear no
longer this repetition of the worst part of yesterday's conversation:
I desire I may throw myself at my father's and mother's feet, and hear
from them what their sentence is. I shall at least avoid, by that means,
the unsisterly insults I meet with from you.

Hey-day! What, is this you? Is it you, my meek sister Clary?

Yes, it is I, Bella; and I will claim the protection due to a child of
the family, or to know why I am to be thus treated, when I offer only to
preserve to myself the liberty of refusal, which belongs to my sex; and,
to please my parents, would give up my choice. I have contented myself
till now to take second-hand messengers, and first-hand insults: you are
but my sister: my brother is not my sovereign. And while I have a father
and mother living, I will not be thus treated by a brother and sister,
and their servants, all setting upon me, as it should seem, to make me
desperate, and do a rash thing.--I will know, in short, sister Bella,
why I am to be constrained thus?--What is intended by it?--And whether I
am to be considered as a child or a slave?

She stood aghast all this time, partly with real, partly with affected,
surprise.

And is it you? Is it indeed you?--Well, Clary, you amaze me! But since
you are so desirous to refer yourself to your father and mother, I will
go down, and tell them what you say. Your friends are not yet gone,
I believe: they shall assemble again; and then you may come down, and
plead your own cause in person.

Let me then. But let my brother and you be absent. You have made
yourselves too much parties against me, to sit as my judges. And I
desire to have none of yours or his interpositions. I am sure you could
not have represented what I proposed fairly: I am sure you could not.
Nor is it possible you should be commissioned to treat me thus.

Well, well, I'll call up my brother to you.--I will indeed.--He shall
justify himself, as well as me.

I desire not to see my brother, except he will come as a brother, laying
aside the authority he has unjustly assumed over me.

And so, Clary, it is nothing to him, or to me, is it, that our sister
shall disgrace her whole family?

As how, Bella, disgrace it?--The man whom you thus freely treat, is a
man of birth and fortune: he is a man of parts, and nobly allied.--He
was once thought worthy of you: and I wish to Heaven you had had him.
I am sure it was not thus my fault you had not, although you treat me
thus.

This set her into a flame: I wish I had forborne it. O how the poor
Bella raved! I thought she would have beat me once or twice: and she
vowed her fingers itched to do so--but I was not worth her anger: yet
she flamed on.

We were heard to be high.--And Betty came up from my mother to command
my sister to attend her.--She went down accordingly, threatening me with
letting every one know what a violent creature I had shewn myself to be.


TUESDAY NOON, MARCH 21.


I have as yet heard no more of my sister: and have not courage enough
to insist upon throwing myself at the feet of my father and mother, as I
thought in my heat of temper I should be able to do. And I am now grown
as calm as ever; and were Bella to come up again, as fit to be played
upon as before.

I am indeed sorry that I sent her from me in such disorder. But my
papa's letter threatening me with my uncle Antony's house and chapel,
terrifies me strangely; and by their silence I'm afraid some new storm
is gathering.

But what shall I do with this Lovelace? I have just now, but the
unsuspected hole in the wall (that I told you of in my letter by Hannah)
got a letter from him--so uneasy is he for fear I should be prevailed
upon in Solmes's favour; so full of menaces, if I am; so resenting
the usage I receive [for, how I cannot tell, but he has undoubtedly
intelligence of all that is done in the family]; such protestations of
inviolable faith and honour; such vows of reformation; such pressing
arguments to escape from this disgraceful confinement--O my Nancy, what
shall I do with this Lovelace?--




LETTER XLIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WENESDAY MORNING, NINE O'CLOCK.


My aunt Hervey lay here last night, and is but just gone from me. She
came up to me with my sister. They would not trust my aunt without this
ill-natured witness. When she entered my chamber, I told her, that this
visit was a high favour to a poor prisoner, in her hard confinement.
I kissed her hand. She, kindly saluting me, said, Why this distance to
your aunt, my dear, who loves you so well?

She owned, that she came to expostulate with me, for the peace-sake of
the family: for that she could not believe it possible, if I did not
conceive myself unkindly treated, that I, who had ever shewn such a
sweetness of temper, as well as manners, should be thus resolute, in a
point so very near to my father, and all my friends. My mother and she
were both willing to impute my resolution to the manner I had been begun
with; and to my supposing that my brother had originally more of a hand
in the proposals made by Mr. Solmes, than my father or other friends. In
short, fain would my aunt have furnished me with an excuse to come off
my opposition; Bell all the while humming a tune, and opening this book
and that, without meaning; but saying nothing.

After having shewed me, that my opposition could not be of
signification, my father's honour being engaged, my aunt concluded with
enforcing upon me my duty, in stronger terms than I believe she would
have done, (the circumstances of the case considered), had not my sister
been present.

It would be repeating what I have so often mentioned, to give you the
arguments that passed on both sides.--So I will only recite what she was
pleased to say, that carried with it a new face.

When she found me inflexible, as she was pleased to call it, she said,
For her part, she could not but say, that if I were not to have either
Mr. Solmes or Mr. Lovelace, and yet, to make my friends easy, must
marry, she should not think amiss of Mr. Wyerley. What did I think of
Mr. Wyerley?

Ay, Clary, put in my sister, what say you to Mr. Wyerley?

I saw through this immediately. It was said on purpose, I doubted
not, to have an argument against me of absolute prepossession in Mr.
Lovelace's favour: since Mr. Wyerley every where avows his value, even
to veneration, for me; and is far less exceptionable both in person and
mind, than Mr. Solmes: and I was willing to turn the tables, by trying
how far Mr. Solmes's terms might be dispensed with; since the same terms
could not be expected from Mr. Wyerley.

I therefore desired to know, whether my answer, if it should be in
favour of Mr. Wyerley, would release me from Mr. Solmes?--For I owned,
that I had not the aversion to him, that I had to the other.

Nay, she had no commission to propose such a thing. She only knew, that
my father and mother would not be easy till Mr. Lovelace's hopes were
entirely defeated.

Cunning creature! said my sister.

And this, and her joining in the question before, convinced me, that it
was a designed snare for me.

Don't you, dear Madam, said I, put questions that can answer no end, but
to support my brother's schemes against me.--But are there any hopes
of an end to my sufferings and disgrace, without having this hated man
imposed upon me? Will not what I have offered be accepted? I am sure it
ought--I will venture to say that.

Why, Niece, if there be not any such hopes, I presume you don't think
yourself absolved from the duty due from a child to her parents?

Yes, said my sister, I do not doubt but it is Miss Clary's aim, if she
does not fly to her Lovelace, to get her estate into her own hands, and
go to live at The Grove, in that independence upon which she builds all
her perverseness. And, dear heart! my little love, how will you then
blaze away! Your mamma Norton, your oracle, with your poor at your
gates, mingling so proudly and so meanly with the ragged herd!
Reflecting, by your ostentation, upon all the ladies in the county,
who do not as you do. This is known to be your scheme! and the poor
without-doors, and Lovelace within, with one hand building up a name,
pulling it down with the other!--O what a charming scheme is this!--But
let me tell you, my pretty little flighty one, that your father's living
will shall controul your grandfather's dead one; and that estate will be
disposed of as your fond grandfather would have disposed of it, had he
lived to see such a change in his favourite. In a word, Miss, it will be
kept out of your hands, till my father sees you discreet enough to have
the management of it, or till you can dutifully, by law, tear it from
him.

Fie, Miss Harlowe! said my aunt: this is not pretty to your sister.

O Madam, let her go on. This is nothing to what I have borne from Miss
Harlowe. She is either commissioned to treat me ill by her envy, or by
an higher authority, to which I must submit.--As to revoking the estate,
what hinders, if I pleased? I know my power; but have not the least
thought of exerting it. Be pleased to let my father know, that, whatever
be the consequence to myself, were he to turn me out of doors, (which
I should rather he would do, than to be confined and insulted as I am),
and were I to be reduced to indigence and want, I would seek no relief
that should be contrary to his will.

For that matter, child, said my aunt, were you to marry, you must do as
your husband will have you. If that husband be Mr. Lovelace, he will be
glad of any opportunity of further embroiling the families. And, let
me tell you, Niece, if he had the respect for you which he pretends to
have, he would not throw out defiances as he does. He is known to be a
very revengeful man; and were I you, Miss Clary, I should be afraid he
would wreak upon me that vengeance, though I had not offended him, which
he is continually threatening to pour upon the family.

Mr. Lovelace's threatened vengeance is in return for threatened
vengeance. It is not every body will bear insult, as, of late, I have
been forced to bear it.

O how my sister's face shone with passion!

But Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, as I have said twenty and twenty times,
would be quite out of question with me, were I to be generously treated!

My sister said something with great vehemence: but only raising my
voice, to be heard, without minding her, Pray, Madam, (provokingly
interrogated I), was he not known to have been as wild a man, when he
was at first introduced into our family, as he now is said to be? Yet
then, the common phrases of wild oats, and black oxen, and such-like,
were qualifiers; and marriage, and the wife's discretion, were to
perform wonders--but (turning to my sister) I find I have said too much.

O thou wicked reflecter!--And what made me abhor him, think you, but
the proof of those villainous freedoms that ought to have had the same
effect upon you, were you but half so good a creature as you pretend to
be?

Proof, did you say, Bella! I thought you had not proof?--But you know
best.

Was not this very spiteful, my dear?

Now, Clary, said she, would I give a thousand pounds to know all that is
in thy little rancorous and reflecting heart at this moment.

I might let you know for a much less sum, and not be afraid of being
worse treated than I have been.

Well, young ladies, I am sorry to see passion run so high between
you. You know, Niece, (to me,) you had not been confined thus to
your apartment, could your mother by condescension, or your father by
authority, have been able to move you. But how can you expect, when
there must be a concession on one side, that it should be on theirs?
If my Dolly, who has not the hundredth part of your understanding, were
thus to set herself up in absolute contradiction to my will, in a point
so material, I should not take it well of her--indeed I should not.

I believe not, Madam: and if Miss Hervey had just such a brother, and
just such a sister [you may look, Bella!] and if both were to aggravate
her parents, as my brother and sister do mine--then, perhaps, you might
use her as I am used: and if she hated the man you proposed to her, and
with as much reason as I do Mr. Solmes--

And loved a rake and libertine, Miss, as you do Lovelace, said my
sister--

Then might she [continued I, not minding her,] beg to be excused from
obeying. Yet if she did, and would give you the most solemn assurances,
and security besides, that she would never have the man you disliked,
against your consent--I dare say, Miss Hervey's father and mother would
sit down satisfied, and not endeavour to force her inclinations.

So!--[said my sister, with uplifted hands] father and mother now come in
for their share!

But if, child, replied my aunt, I knew she loved a rake, and suspected
that she sought only to gain time, in order to wire-draw me into a
consent--

I beg pardon, Madam, for interrupting you; but if Miss Hervey could
obtain your consent, what further would be said?

True, child; but she never should.

Then, Madam, it would never be.

That I doubt, Niece.

If you do, Madam, can you think confinement and ill usage is the way to
prevent the apprehended rashness?

My dear, this sort of intimation would make one but too apprehensive,
that there is no trusting to yourself, when one knows your inclination.

That apprehension, Madam, seems to have been conceived before this
intimation, or the least cause for it, was given. Why else the
disgraceful confinement I have been laid under?--Let me venture to say,
that my sufferings seem to be rather owing to a concerted design to
intimidate me [Bella held up her hands], (knowing there were too good
grounds for my opposition,) than to a doubt of my conduct; for, when
they were inflicted first, I had given no cause of doubt: nor should
there now be room for any, if my discretion might be trusted to.

My aunt, after a little hesitation, said, But, consider, my dear, what
confusion will be perpetuated in your family, if you marry this hated
Lovelace!

And let it be considered, what misery to me, Madam, if I marry that
hated Solmes!

Many a young creature has thought she could not love a man, with whom
she has afterwards been very happy. Few women, child, marry their first
loves.

That may be the reason there are so few happy marriages.

But there are few first impressions fit to be encouraged.

I am afraid so too, Madam. I have a very indifferent opinion of light
and first impressions. But, as I have often said, all I wish for is, to
have leave to live single.

Indeed you must not, Miss. Your father and mother will be unhappy till
they see you married, and out of Lovelace's reach. I am told that you
propose to condition with him (so far are matters gone between you)
never to have any man, if you have not him.

I know no better way to prevent mischief on all sides, I freely own
it--and there is not, if he be out of the question, another man in the
world I can think favourably of. Nevertheless, I would give all I have
in the world, that he were married to some other person--indeed I would,
Bella, for all you put on that smile of incredulity.

May be so, Clary: but I will smile for all that.

If he be out of the question! repeated my aunt--So, Miss Clary, I see
how it is--I will go down--[Miss Harlowe, shall I follow you?]--And I
will endeavour to persuade your father to let my sister herself come up:
and a happier event may then result.

Depend upon it, Madam, said my sister, this will be the case: my mother
and she will both be in tears; but with this different effect: my
mother will come down softened, and cut to the heart; but will leave her
favourite hardened, from the advantages she will think she has over my
mother's tenderness--why, Madam, it is for this very reason the girl is
not admitted into her presence.

Thus she ran on, as she went downstairs.

END OF VOL. 1


Project Gutenberg's Clarissa, Volume 2 (of 9), by Samuel Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Clarissa, Volume 2 (of 9)

Author: Samuel Richardson

Release Date: January, 2006 [EBook #9798]
Posting Date: August 1, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLARISSA, VOLUME 2 (OF 9) ***




Produced by Julie C. Sparks





CLARISSA HARLOWE

or the

HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY

By Samuel Richardson


Nine Volumes

Volume II.




LETTERS OF VOLUME II


LETTER I. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Another visit from her aunt and
sister. The latter spitefully insults her with the patterns. A tender
scene between her aunt and her in Arabella's absence. She endeavours to
account for the inflexibility of her parents and uncles.

LETTER II. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Humourous description of Mr. Hickman.
Imagines, from what Lovelace, Hickman, and Solmes, are now, what figures
they made when boys at school.

LETTER III. From the same.--Useful observations on general life. Severe
censures of the Harlowe family, for their pride, formality, and other
bad qualities.

LETTER IV. From the same.--Mr. Hickman's conversation with two of
Lovelace's libertine companions.

LETTER V. From the same.--An unexpected visit from Mr. Lovelace. What
passes in it. Repeats her advice to her to resume her estate.

LETTER VI. VII. VIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Farther particulars of the
persecutions she receives from her violent brother.

LETTER IX. From the same.--Impertinence of Betty Barnes. Overhears her
brother and sister encourage Solmes to persevere in his address. She
writes warmly to her brother upon it.

LETTER X. From the same.--Receives a provoking letter from her sister.
Writes to her mother. Her mother's severe reply. Is impatient. Desires
Miss Howe's advice what course to pursue. Tries to compose her angry
passions at her harpsichord. An Ode to Wisdom, by a Lady.

LETTER XI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Chides her for misrepresenting Mr.
Hickman. Fully answers her arguments about resuming her estate. Her
impartiality with regard to what Miss Howe says of Lovelace, Solmes, and
her brother. Reflections on revenge and duelling.

LETTER XII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Sir Harry Downeton's account of what
passed between himself and Solmes. She wishes her to avoid both men.
Admires her for her manifold excellencies.

LETTER XIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Why she cannot overcome her
aversion to Solmes. Sharp letter to Lovelace. On what occasion. All his
difficulties, she tells him, owning to his faulty morals; which level
all distinction. Insists upon his laying aside all thoughts of her. Her
impartial and dutiful reasonings on her difficult situation.

LETTER XIV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--A notable debate between her and her
mother on her case. Those who marry for love seldom so happy as those
who marry for convenience. Picture of a modern marriage. A lesson both
to parents and children in love-cases. Handsome men seldom make good
husbands. Miss Howe reflects on the Harlowe family, as not famous for
strictness in religion or piety. Her mother's partiality for Hickman.

LETTER XV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her increased apprehensions.
Warmly defends her own mother. Extenuates her father's feelings; and
expostulates with her on her undeserved treatment of Mr. Hickman. A
letter to her from Solmes. Her spirited answer. All in an uproar about
it. Her aunt Hervey's angry letter to her. She writes to her mother. Her
letter returned unopened. To her father. He tears her letter in pieces,
and sends it back to her. She then writes a pathetic letter to her uncle
Harlowe.

LETTER XVI. From the same.--Receives a gentler answer than she expected
from her uncle Harlowe. Makes a new proposal in a letter to him, which
she thinks must be accepted. Her relations assembled upon it. Her
opinion of the sacrifice which a child ought to make to her parents.

LETTER XVII. From the same.--She tells her that the proposal she had
made to her relations, on which she had built so much, is rejected.
Betty's saucy report upon it. Her brother's provoking letter to her.
Her letter to her uncle Harlowe on the occasion. Substance of a letter
excusatory from Mr. Lovelace. He presses for an interview with her in
the garden.

LETTER XVIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her uncle's angry answer.
Substance of a humble letter from Mr. Lovelace. He has got a violent
cold and hoarseness, by his fruitless attendance all night in the
coppice. She is sorry he is not well. Makes a conditional appointment
with him for the next night, in the garden. Hates tyranny in all shapes.

LETTER XIX. From the same.--A characteristic dialogue with the pert
Betty Barnes. Women have great advantage over men in all the powers that
relate to the imagination. Makes a request to her uncle Harlowe, which
is granted, on condition that she will admit of a visit from Solmes. She
complies; and appoints that day sevennight. Then writes to Lovelace
to suspend the intended interview. Desires Miss Howe to inquire into
Lovelace's behaviour at the little inn he puts up at in his way to
Harlowe-Place.

LETTER XX. From the same.--Receives a letter from Lovelace, written
in very high terms, on her suspending the interview. Her angry answer.
Resolves against any farther correspondence with him.

LETTER XXI. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Humourous account of her mother and
Mr. Hickman in their little journey to visit her dying cousin. Rallies
her on her present displeasure with Lovelace.

LETTER XXII. Mr. Hickman to Mrs. Howe.--Resenting Miss Howe's treatment
of him.

LETTER XXIII. Mrs. Howe. In answer.

LETTER XXIV. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Observes upon the contents of her
seven last letters. Advises her to send all the letters and papers she
would not have her relations see; also a parcel of clothes, linen, &c.
Is in hopes of procuring an asylum for her with her mother, if things
come to extremity.

LETTER XXV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Requisites of true satire. Rejoices
in the hopes she gives of her mother's protection. Deposits a parcel
of linen, and all Lovelace's letters. Useful observations relating to
family management, and to neatness of person and dress. Her contrivances
to amuse Betty Barnes.

LETTER XXVI. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Result of her inquiry after
Lovelace's behaviour at the inn. Doubts not but he has ruined the
innkeeper's daughter. Passionately inveighs against him.

LETTER XXVII. Clarissa. In answer.--Is extremely alarmed at Lovelace's
supposed baseness. Declares her abhorrence of him.

LETTER XXVIII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Lovelace, on inquiry, comes out
to be not only innocent with regard to his Rosebud, but generous. Miss
Howe rallies her on the effects this intelligence must have upon her
generosity.

LETTER XXIX. Clarissa. In reply.--Acknowledges her generosity engaged
in his favour. Frankly expresses tenderness and regard for him; and owns
that the intelligence of his supposed baseness had affected her more
than she thinks it ought. Contents of a letter she has received from
him. Pities him. Writes to him that her rejection of Solmes is not in
favour to himself; for that she is determined to hold herself free
to obey her parents, (as she had offered to them,) of their giving up
Solmes. Reproaches him for his libertine declarations in all companies
against matrimony. Her notions of filial duty, notwithstanding the
persecutions she meets with.

LETTER XXX. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Her treatment of Mr. Hickman on his
intrusion into her company. Applauds Clarissa for the generosity of her
spirit, and the greatness of her mind.

LETTER XXXI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Dr. Lewen makes her a formal visit.
Affected civility of her brother and sister to her. Is visited by her
uncle Harlowe: and by her sister. She penetrates the low art designed in
this change of their outward behaviour. Substance of Lovelace's reply
to her last. He acknowledges his folly for having ever spoken lightly of
matrimony.

LETTER XXXII. From the same.--Another letter from Mr. Lovelace, in
which he expresses himself extremely apprehensive of the issue of
her interview with Solmes. Presses her to escape; proposes means for
effecting it; and threatens to rescue her by violence, if they attempt
to carry her to her uncle Antony's against her will. Her terror on the
occasion. She insists, in her answer, on his forbearing to take any rash
step; and expresses herself highly dissatisfied that he should think
himself entitled to dispute her father's authority in removing her to
her uncle's. She relies on Mrs. Howe's protection till her cousin Morden
arrives.

LETTER XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--A visit from her aunt Hervey,
preparative to the approaching interview with Solmes. Her aunt tells her
what is expected on her having consented to that interview.

LETTER XXXIV. XXXV. From the same.--A particular account of what passed
in the interview with Solmes; and of the parts occasionally taken in
it by her boisterous uncle, by her brutal brother, by her implacable
sister, and by her qualifying aunt. Her perseverance and distress. Her
cousin Dolly's tenderness for her. Her closet searched for papers. All
the pens and ink they find taken from her.

LETTER XXXVI. From the same.--Substance of a letter from Lovelace. His
proposals, promises, and declarations. All her present wish is, to be
able to escape Solmes, on one hand, and to avoid incurring the disgrace
of refuging with the family of a man at enmity with her own, on the
other. Her emotions behind the yew-hedge on seeing her father going into
the garden. Grieved at what she hears him say. Dutiful message to
her mother. Harshly answered. She censures Mr. Lovelace for his rash
threatenings to rescue her. Justifies her friends for resenting them;
and condemns herself for corresponding with him at first.

LETTER XXXVII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Is vexed at the heart to be
obliged to tell her that her mother refuses to receive and protect her.
Offers to go away privately with her.

LETTER XXXVIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Her disinterested arguments in
Mrs. Howe's favour, on her refusal to receive her. All her consolation
is, that her unhappy situation is not owing to her own inadvertence of
folly. Is afraid she is singled out, either for her own faults, or for
those of her family, or perhaps for the faults of both, to be a very
unhappy creature. Justifies the ways of Providence, let what will befal
her: and argues with exemplary greatness of mind on this subject. Warmly
discourages Miss Howe's motion to accompany her in her flight.

LETTER XXXIX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Further instances of her
impartiality in condemning Lovelace, and reasoning for her parents.
Overhears her brother and sister exulting in the success of their
schemes; and undertaking, the one to keep his father up to his
resentment on occasion of Lovelace's menaces, the other her mother.
Exasperated at this, and at what her aunt Hervey tells her, she writes
to Lovelace, that she will meet him the following Monday, and throw
herself into the protection of the ladies of his family.

LETTER XL. From the same.--Her frightful dream. Now that Lovelace has
got her letter, she repents her appointment.

LETTER XLI. From the same.--Receives a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full
of transport, vows, and promises. He presumes upon her being his on her
getting away, though she has not given him room for such hopes. In her
answer she tells him, 'that she looks not upon herself as absolutely
bound by her appointment: that there are many points to be adjusted
between them (were she to leave her father's house) before she can give
him particular encouragement: that he must expect she will do her utmost
to procure a reconciliation with her father, and his approbation of
her future steps.' All her friends are to be assembled on the following
Wednesday: she is to be brought before them. How to be proceeded with.
Lovelace, in his reply, asks pardon for writing to her with so much
assurance; and declares his entire acquiescence with her will and
pleasure.

LETTER XLII. From the same.--Confirms her appointment; but tells him
what he is not to expect. Promises, that if she should change her mind
as to withdrawing, she will take the first opportunity to see him, and
acquaint him with her reasons. Reflections on what she has done. Her
deep regret to be thus driven.

LETTER XLIII. Miss Howe to Clarissa.--Reasons why she ought to allow her
to accompany her in her flight. Punctilio at an end, the moment she is
out of her father's house. Requisites of friendship. Questions whether
she will not rather choose to go off with one of her own sex than
with Lovelace? And if not, whether she should not marry him as soon as
possible?

LETTER XLIV. Clarissa to Miss Howe, (Miss Howe's last not received.)
Lovelace promises compliance, in every article, with her pleasure.
Her heart misgives her notwithstanding. She knows not but she may yet
recede.

LETTER XLV. From the same. In answer to Letter XLIII.--Reflections
worthy of herself on some of the passages in Miss Howe's last letter.
Gives her home-put questions a full consideration; and determines NOT to
withdraw with Lovelace.

LETTER XLVI. XLVII. From the same.--Substance of her letter to Lovelace,
revoking her appointment. Thinks herself obliged (her letter being not
taken away) as well by promise as in order to prevent mischief, to meet
him, and to give him her reason for revoking.--The hour of meeting now
at hand, she is apprehensive of the contest she shall have with him, as
he will come with a different expectation.

LETTER XLVIII. From the same.--Dated from St. Alban's. Writes in the
utmost anguish of mind for the little parcel of linen she had sent to
her with better hopes. Condemns her own rashness in meeting Lovelace.
Begs her pity and her prayers.




THE HISTORY OF CLARISSA HARLOWE




LETTER I

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


My heart fluttered with the hope and the fear of seeing my mother, and
with the shame and grief of having given her so much uneasiness. But it
needed not: she was not permitted to come. But my aunt was so good as to
return, yet not without my sister; and, taking my hand, made me sit down
by her.

She came, she must own, officiously, she said, this once more,
though against the opinion of my father: but knowing and dreading the
consequence of my opposition, she could not but come.

She then set forth to my friends' expectation from me; Mr. Solmes's
riches (three times as rich he came out to be, as any body had thought
him); the settlements proposed; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; their
aversions to him; all in a very strong light; not in a stronger than
my mother had before placed them in. My mother, surely, could not have
given the particulars of what had passed between herself and me: if she
had, my aunt would not have repeated many of the same sentiments, as
you will find she did, that had been still more strongly urged, without
effect by her venerable sister.

She said it would break the heart of my father to have it imagined that
he had not a power over his own child; and that, as he thought, for
my own good: a child too, whom they had always doated upon!--Dearest,
dearest Miss, concluded she, clasping her fingers, with the most
condescending earnestness, let me beg of you, for my sake, for your own
sake, for a hundred sakes, to get over this averseness, to give up your
prejudices, and make every one happy and easy once more.--I would kneel
to you, my dearest Niece--nay, I will kneel to you--!

And down she dropt, and I with her, kneeling to her, and beseeching her
not to kneel; clasping my arms about her, and bathing her worthy bosom
with my tears.

O rise! rise! my beloved Aunt, said I: you cut me to the heart with this
condescending goodness.

Say then, my dearest Niece, say then, that you will oblige all your
friends!--If you love us, I beseech you do--

How can I perform what I can sooner choose to die than to perform--!

Say then, my dear, that you will consider of it. Say you will but
reason with yourself. Give us but hopes. Don't let me entreat, and thus
entreat, in vain--[for still she kneeled, and I by her].

What a hard case is mine!--Could I but doubt, I know I could
conquer.--That which is an inducement to my friends, is none at all to
me--How often, my dearest Aunt, must I repeat the same thing?--Let me
but be single--Cannot I live single? Let me be sent, as I have proposed,
to Scotland, to Florence, any where: let me be sent a slave to the
Indies, any where--any of these I will consent to. But I cannot, cannot
think of giving my vows to man I cannot endure!

Well then, rising, (Bella silently, with uplifted hands, reproaching my
supposed perverseness,) I see nothing can prevail with you to oblige us.

What can I do, my dearest Aunt Hervey? What can I do? Were I capable of
giving a hope I meant not to enlarge, then could I say, I would consider
of your kind advice. But I would rather be thought perverse than
insincere. Is there, however, no medium? Can nothing be thought of? Will
nothing do, but to have a man who is the more disgustful to me, because
he is unjust in the very articles he offers?

Whom now, Clary, said my sister, do you reflect upon? Consider that.

Make not invidious applications of what I say, Bella. It may not be
looked upon in the same light by every one. The giver and the accepter
are principally answerable in an unjust donation. While I think of it in
this light, I should be inexcusable to be the latter. But why do I enter
upon a supposition of this nature?--My heart, as I have often, often
said, recoils, at the thought of the man, in every light.--Whose father,
but mine, agrees upon articles where there is no prospect of a liking?
Where the direct contrary is avowed, all along avowed, without the
least variation, or shadow of a change of sentiment?--But it is not my
father's doing originally. O my cruel, cruel brother, to cause a measure
to be forced upon me, which he would not behave tolerably under, were
the like to be offered to him!

The girl is got into her altitudes, Aunt Hervey, said my sister. You
see, Madam, she spares nobody. Be pleased to let her know what she has
to trust to. Nothing is to be done with her. Pray, Madam, pronounce her
doom.

My aunt retired to the window, weeping, with my sister in her hand:
I cannot, indeed I cannot, Miss Harlowe, said she, softly, (but yet I
heard every word she said): there is great hardship in her case. She
is a noble child after all. What pity things are gone so far!--But Mr.
Solmes ought to be told to desist.

O Madam, said my sister, in a kind of loud whisper, are you caught too
by the little siren?--My mother did well not to come up!--I question
whether my father himself, after his first indignation, would not be
turned round by her. Nobody but my brother can do any thing with her, I
am sure.

Don't think of your brother's coming up, said my aunt, still in a low
voice--He is too furious. I see no obstinacy, no perverseness, in
her manner! If your brother comes, I will not be answerable for the
consequences: for I thought twice or thrice she would have gone into
fits.

O Madam, she has a strong heart!--And you see there is no prevailing
with her, though you were upon your knees to her.

My sister left my aunt musing at the window, with her back towards us,
and took that opportunity to insult me still more barbarously; for,
stepping to my closet, she took up the patterns which my mother had sent
me up, and bringing them to me, she spread them upon the chair by me;
and offering one, and then another, upon her sleeve and shoulder, thus
she ran on, with great seeming tranquility, but whisperingly, that my
aunt might not hear her. This, Clary, is a pretty pattern enough: but
this is quite charming! I would advise you to make your appearance in
it. And this, were I you, should be my wedding night-gown--And this
my second dressed suit! Won't you give orders, love, to have your
grandmother's jewels new set?--Or will you thing to shew away in the new
ones Mr. Solmes intends to present to you? He talks of laying out two
or three thousand pounds in presents, child! Dear heart!--How gorgeously
will you be array'd! What! silent still?--But, Clary, won't you have a
velvet suit? It would cut a great figure in a country church, you know:
and the weather may bear it for a month yet to come. Crimson velvet,
suppose! Such a fine complexion as yours, how it would be set off by it!
What an agreeable blush would it give you!--Heigh-ho! (mocking me, for I
sighed to be thus fooled with,) and do you sigh, love?--Well then, as it
will be a solemn wedding, what think you of black velvet, child?--Silent
still, Clary?--Black velvet, so fair as you are, with those charming
eyes, gleaming through a wintry cloud, like an April sun!--Does not
Lovelace tell you they are charming eyes?--How lovely will you appear to
every one!--What! silent still, love?--But about your laces, Clary?--

She would have gone on still further, had not my aunt advance towards
me, wiping her eyes--What! whispering ladies! You seem so easy and so
pleased, Miss Harlowe, with your private conference, that I hope I shall
carry down good news.

I am only giving her my opinion of her patterns, here.--Unasked indeed;
but she seems, by her silence, to approve of my judgment.

O Bella! said I, that Mr. Lovelace had not taken you at your word!--You
had before now been exercising your judgment on your own account: and I
had been happy as well as you! Was it my fault, I pray you, that it was
not so?--

O how she raved!

To be so ready to give, Bella, and so loth to take, is not very fair in
you.

The poor Bella descended to call names.

Why, Sister, said I, you are as angry, as if there were more in the
hint than possibly might be designed. My wish is sincere, for both our
sakes!--for the whole family's sake!--And what (good now) is there in
it?--Do not, do not, dear Bella, give me cause to suspect, that I have
found a reason for your behaviour to me, and which till now was wholly
unaccountable from sister to sister--

Fie, fie, Clary! said my aunt.

My sister was more and more outrageous.

O how much fitter, said I, to be a jest, than a jester!--But now, Bella,
turn the glass to you, and see how poorly sits the robe upon your own
shoulders, which you have been so unmercifully fixing upon mine!

Fie, fie, Miss Clary! repeated my aunt.

And fie, fie, likewise, good Madam, to Miss Harlowe, you would say, were
you to have heard her barbarous insults!

Let us go, Madam, said my sister, with great violence; let us leave the
creature to swell till she bursts with her own poison.--The last time I
will ever come near her, in the mind I am in!

It is so easy a thing, returned I, were I to be mean enough to follow
an example that is so censurable in the setter of it, to vanquish such
a teasing spirit as your's with its own blunt weapons, that I am amazed
you will provoke me!--Yet, Bella, since you will go, (for she had
hurried to the door,) forgive me. I forgive you. And you have a double
reason to do so, both from eldership and from the offence so studiously
given to one in affliction. But may you be happy, though I never shall!
May you never have half the trials I have had! Be this your comfort,
that you cannot have a sister to treat you as you have treated me!--And
so God bless you!

O thou art a--And down she flung without saying what.

Permit me, Madam, said I to my aunt, sinking down, and clasping her
knees with my arms, to detain you one moment--not to say any thing about
my poor sister--she is her own punisher--only to thank you for all
your condescending goodness to me. I only beg of you not to impute to
obstinacy the immovableness I have shown to so tender a friend; and to
forgive me every thing I have said or done amiss in your presence, for
it has not proceeded from inward rancour to the poor Bella. But I will
be bold to say, that neither she, nor my brother, nor even my father
himself, knows what a heart they have set a bleeding.

I saw, to my comfort, what effect my sister's absence wrought for
me.--Rise, my noble-minded Niece!--Charming creature! [those were her
kind words] kneel not to me!--Keep to yourself what I now say to you.--I
admire you more than I can express--and if you can forbear claiming your
estate, and can resolve to avoid Lovelace, you will continue to be the
greatest miracle I ever knew at your years--but I must hasten down after
your sister.--These are my last words to you: 'Conform to your father's
will, if you possibly can. How meritorious will it be in you if you do
so! Pray to God to enable you to conform. You don't know what may be
done.'

Only, my dear Aunt, one word, one word more (for she was going)--Speak
all you can for my dear Mrs. Norton. She is but low in the world: should
ill health overtake her, she may not know how to live without my mamma's
favour. I shall have no means to help her; for I will want necessaries
before I will assert my right: and I do assure you, she has said so many
things to me in behalf of my submitting to my father's will, that her
arguments have not a little contributed to make me resolve to avoid the
extremities, which nevertheless I pray to God they do not at last force
me upon. And yet they deprive me of her advice, and think unjustly of
one of the most excellent of women.

I am glad to hear you say this: and take this, and this, and this, my
charming Niece! (for so she called me almost at every word, kissing me
earnestly, and clasping her arms about my neck:) and God protect you,
and direct you! But you must submit: indeed you must. Some one day in a
month from this is all the choice that is left you.

And this, I suppose, was the doom my sister called for; and yet no worse
than what had been pronounced upon me before.

She repeated these last sentences louder than the former. 'And remember,
Miss,' added she, 'it is your duty to comply.'--And down she went,
leaving me with my heart full, and my eyes running over.

The very repetition of this fills me with almost equal concern to that
which I felt at the time.

I must lay down my pen. Mistiness, which give to the deluged eye the
appearance of all the colours in the rainbow, will not permit me to
write on.


WEDNESDAY, FIVE O'CLOCK


I will now add a few lines--My aunt, as she went down from me, was met
at the foot of the stairs by my sister, who seemed to think she had
staid a good while after her; and hearing her last words prescribing
to me implicit duty, praised her for it, and exclaimed against my
obstinacy. Did you ever hear of such perverseness, Madam? said she:
Could you have thought that your Clarissa and every body's Clarissa, was
such a girl?--And who, as you said, is to submit, her father or she?

My aunt said something in answer to her, compassionating me, as I
thought, by her accent: but I heard not the words.

Such a strange perseverance in a measure so unreasonable!--But my
brother and sister are continually misrepresenting all I say and do; and
I am deprived of the opportunity of defending myself!--My sister says,*
that had they thought me such a championess, they you not have engaged
with me: and now, not knowing how to reconcile my supposed obstinacy
with my general character and natural temper, they seem to hope to tire
me out, and resolve to vary their measures accordingly. My brother, you
see,** is determined to carry this point, or to abandon Harlowe-place,
and never to see it more. So they are to lose a son, or to conquer
a daughter--the perversest and most ungrateful that ever parents
had!--This is the light he places things in: and has undertaken, it
seems, to subdue me, if his advice should be followed. It will be
farther tried; of that I am convinced; and what will be their next
measure, who can divine?


     * See Letter XLII. of Vol. I.

     ** Ibid.


I shall dispatch, with this, my answer to your's of Sunday last, begun
on Monday;* but which is not yet quite finished. It is too long to copy:
I have not time for it. In it I have been very free with you, my dear,
in more places than one. I cannot say that I am pleased with all I have
written--yet will not now alter it. My mind is not at ease enough for
the subject. Don't be angry with me. Yet, if you can excuse one or two
passages, it will be because they were written by

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.


     * See Letter XL, ibid.




LETTER II

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE WEDNESDAY NIGHT, MARCH 22.


ANGRY!--What should I be angry for? I am mightily pleased with your
freedom, as you call it. I only wonder at your patience with me; that's
all. I am sorry I gave you the trouble of so long a letter upon the
occasion,* notwithstanding the pleasure I received in reading it.


     * See Vol. I, Letter XXXVII, for the occasion; and Letters
     XXXVIII. and XL. of the same volume, for the freedom
     Clarissa apologizes for.


I believe you did not intend reserves to me: for two reasons I believe
you did not: First, because you say you did not: Next, because you have
not as yet been able to convince yourself how it is to be with you; and
persecuted as you are, how so to separate the effects that spring from
the two causes [persecution and love] as to give to each its particular
due. But this I believe I hinted to you once before; and so will say no
more upon this subject at present.

Robin says, you had but just deposited your last parcel when he took it:
for he was there but half an hour before, and found nothing. He had seen
my impatience, and loitered about, being willing to bring me something
from you, if possible.

My cousin Jenny Fynnett is here, and desires to be my bedfellow
to-night. So I shall not have an opportunity to sit down with that
seriousness and attention which the subjects of yours require. For she
is all prate, you know, and loves to set me a prating; yet comes upon
a very grave occasion--to procure my mother to go with her to her
grandmother Larking, who has long been bed-ridden; and at last has taken
it into her head that she is mortal, and therefore will make her will; a
work she was till now extremely averse to; but it must be upon condition
that my mother, who is her distant relation, will go to her, and advise
her as to the particulars of it: for she has a high opinion, as every
one else has, of my mother's judgment in all matters relating to wills,
settlements, and such-like notable affairs.

Mrs. Larking lives about seventeen miles off; and as my mother cannot
endure to lie out of her own house, she proposes to set out early in
the morning, that she might be able to get back again at night. So,
to-morrow I shall be at your devotion from day-light to day-light; nor
will I be at home to any body.

I have hinted before, that I could almost wish my mother and Mr. Hickman
would make a match of it: and I here repeat my wishes. What signifies
a difference of fifteen or twenty years; especially when the lady has
spirits that will make her young a long time, and the lover is a mighty
sober man?--I think, verily, I could like him better for a papa, than
for a nearer relation: and they are strange admirers of one another.

But allow me a perhaps still better (and, as to years, more suitable and
happier) disposal; for the man at least.--What think you, my dear, of
compromising with your friends, by rejecting both men, and encouraging
my parader?--If your liking one of the two go no farther than
conditional, I believe it will do. A rich thought, if it obtain your
approbation! In this light, I should have a prodigious respect for
Mr. Hickman; more by half than I can have in the other. The vein is
opened--Shall I let it flow? How difficult to withstand constitutional
foibles!

Hickman is certainly a man more in your taste than any of those who have
hitherto been brought to address you. He is mighty sober, mighty grave,
and all that. Then you have told me, that he is your favourite. But that
is because he is my mother's perhaps. The man would certainly rejoice at
the transfer; or he must be a greater fool than I take him to be.

O but your fierce lover would knock him o' the head--I forgot
that!--What makes me incapable of seriousness when I write about
Hickman?--Yet the man so good a sort of man in the main!--But who is
perfect? This is one of my foibles: and it is something for you to chide
me for.

You believe me to be very happy in my prospect in relation to him:
because you are so very unhappy in the foolish usage you meet with, you
are apt (as I suspect) to think that tolerable which otherwise would be
far from being so. I dare say, you would not, with all your grave airs,
like him for yourself; except, being addressed by Solmes and him, you
were obliged to have one of them.--I have given you a test. Let me see
what you will say to it.

For my own part, I confess to you, that I have great exceptions to
Hickman. He and wedlock never yet once entered into my head at one time.
Shall I give you my free thoughts of him?--Of his best and his worst;
and that as if I were writing to one who knows him not?--I think I will.
Yet it is impossible I should do it gravely. The subject won't bear to
be so treated in my opinion. We are not come so far as that yet, if ever
we shall: and to do it in another strain, ill becomes my present real
concern for you.


*****


Here I was interrupted on the honest man's account. He has been here
these two hours--courting the mother for the daughter, I suppose--yet
she wants no courting neither: 'Tis well one of us does; else the man
would have nothing but halcyon; and be remiss, and saucy of course.

He was going. His horses at the door. My mother sent for me down,
pretending to want to say something to me.

Something she said when I came that signified nothing--Evidently, for no
reason called me, but to give me an opportunity to see what a fine bow
her man could make; and that she might wish me a good night. She knows
I am not over ready to oblige him with my company, if I happen to be
otherwise engaged. I could not help an air a little upon the fretful,
when I found she had nothing of moment to say to me, and when I saw her
intention.

She smiled off the visible fretfulness, that the man might go away in
good humour with himself.

He bowed to the ground, and would have taken my hand, his whip in the
other. I did not like to be so companioned: I withdrew my hand, but
touched his elbow with a motion, as if from his low bow I had supposed
him falling, and would have helped him up--A sad slip, it might have
been! said I.

A mad girl! smiled it off my mother.

He was quite put out; took his horse-bridle, stumped back, back, back,
bowing, till he run against his servant. I laughed. He mounted his
horse. I mounted up stairs, after a little lecture; and my head is so
filled with him, that I must resume my intention, in hopes to divert you
for a few moments.

Take it then--his best, and his worst, as I said before.

Hickman is a sort of fiddling, busy, yet, to borrow a word from you,
unbusy man: has a great deal to do, and seems to me to dispatch nothing.
Irresolute and changeable in every thing, but in teasing me with his
nonsense; which yet, it is evident, he must continue upon my mother's
interest more than upon his own hopes; for none have I given him.

Then I have a quarrel against his face, though in his person, for
a well-thriven man, tolerably genteel--Not to his features so much
neither; for what, as you have often observed, are features in a
man?--But Hickman, with strong lines, and big cheek and chin bones,
has not the manliness in his aspect, which Lovelace has with the most
regular and agreeable features.

Then what a set and formal mortal he is in some things!--I have not been
able yet to laugh him out of his long bid and beads. Indeed, that is,
because my mother thinks they become him; and I would not be so free
with him, as to own I should choose to have him leave it off. If he did,
so particular is the man, he would certainly, if left to himself, fall
into a King-William's cravat, or some such antique chin-cushion, as by
the pictures of that prince one sees was then the fashion.

As to his dress in general, he cannot indeed be called a sloven, but
sometimes he is too gaudy, at other times too plain, to be uniformly
elegant. And for his manners, he makes such a bustle with them, and
about them, as would induce one to suspect that they are more strangers
than familiars to him. You, I know, lay this to his fearfulness of
disobliging or offending. Indeed your over-doers generally give the
offence they endeavour to avoid.

The man however is honest: is of family: has a clear and good estate;
and may one day be a baronet, an't please you. He is humane and
benevolent, tolerably generous, as people say; and as I might say too,
if I would accept of his bribes; which he offers in hopes of having them
all back again, and the bribed into the bargain. A method taken by all
corrupters, from old Satan, to the lowest of his servants. Yet, to speak
in the language of a person I am bound to honour, he is deemed a prudent
man; that is to say a good manager.

Then I cannot but confess, that now I like not anybody better, whatever
I did once.

He is no fox-hunter: he keeps a pack indeed; but prefers not his hounds
to his fellow-creatures. No bad sign for a wife, I own. He loves his
horse; but dislikes racing in a gaming way, as well as all sorts of
gaming. Then he is sober; modest; they say, virtuous; in short,
has qualities that mothers would be fond of in a husband for their
daughters; and for which perhaps their daughters would be the happier
could they judge as well for themselves, as experience possibly may
teach them to judge for their future daughters.

Nevertheless, to own the truth, I cannot say I love the man: nor, I
believe, ever shall.

Strange! that these sober fellows cannot have a decent sprightliness,
a modest assurance with them! Something debonnaire; which need not be
separated from that awe and reverence, when they address a woman, which
should shew the ardour of their passion, rather than the sheepishness
of their nature; for who knows not that love delights in taming the
lion-hearted? That those of the sex, who are most conscious of their
own defect in point of courage, naturally require, and therefore as
naturally prefer, the man who has most of it, as the most able to give
them the requisite protection? That the greater their own cowardice, as
it would be called in a man, the greater is their delight in subjects
of heroism? As may be observed in their reading; which turns upon
difficulties encountered, battles fought, and enemies overcome, four or
five hundred by the prowess of one single hero, the more improbable the
better: in short, that their man should be a hero to every one living
but themselves; and to them know no bound to his humility. A woman has
some glory in subduing a heart no man living can appall; and hence too
often the bravo, assuming the hero, and making himself pass for one,
succeeds as only a hero should.

But as for honest Hickman, the good man is so generally meek, as I
imagine, that I know not whether I have any preference paid me in his
obsequiousness. And then, when I rate him, he seems to be so naturally
fitted for rebuke, and so much expects it, that I know not how to
disappoint him, whether he just then deserve it, or not. I am sure, he
has puzzled me many a time when I have seen him look penitent for faults
he has not committed, whether to pity or laugh at him.

You and I have often retrospected the faces and minds of grown people;
that is to say, have formed images for their present appearances,
outside and in, (as far as the manners of the persons would justify us
in the latter) what sort of figures they made when boys and girls. And
I'll tell you the lights in which HICKMAN, SOLMES, and LOVELACE, our
three heroes, have appeared to me, supposing them boys at school.

Solmes I have imagined to be a little sordid, pilfering rogue, who would
purloin from every body, and beg every body's bread and butter from him;
while, as I have heard a reptile brag, he would in a winter-morning spit
upon his thumbs, and spread his own with it, that he might keep it all
to himself.

Hickman, a great overgrown, lank-haired, chubby boy, who would be
hunched and punched by every body; and go home with his finger in his
eye, and tell his mother.

While Lovelace I have supposed a curl-pated villain, full of fire,
fancy, and mischief; an orchard-robber, a wall-climber, a horse-rider
without saddle or bridle, neck or nothing: a sturdy rogue, in short,
who would kick and cuff, and do no right, and take no wrong of any
body; would get his head broke, then a plaster for it, or let it heal
of itself; while he went on to do more mischief, and if not to get,
to deserve, broken bones. And the same dispositions have grown up with
them, and distinguish them as me, with no very material alteration.

Only that all men are monkeys more or less, or else that you and I
should have such baboons as these to choose out of, is a mortifying
thing, my dear.

I am sensible that I am a little out of season in treating thus
ludicrously the subject I am upon, while you are so unhappy; and if
my manner does not divert you, as my flightiness used to do, I am
inexcusable both to you, and to my own heart: which, I do assure you,
notwithstanding my seeming levity, is wholly in your case.

As this letter is extremely whimsical, I will not send it until I can
accompany it with something more solid and better suited to your
unhappy circumstances; that is to say, to the present subject of our
correspondence. To-morrow, as I told you, will be wholly my own, and of
consequence yours. Adieu, therefore, till then.




LETTER III

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE TUESDAY MORN. 7 O'CLOCK


My mother and cousin are already gone off in our chariot and four,
attended by their doughty 'squire on horseback, and he by two of his
own servants, and one of my mother's. They both love parade when they
go abroad, at least in compliment to one another; which shews, that
each thinks the other does. Robin is your servant and mine, and nobody's
else--and the day is all my own.

I must begin with blaming you, my dear, for your resolution not to
litigate for your right, if occasion were to be given you. Justice is
due to ourselves, as well as to every body else. Still more must I blame
you for declaring to your aunt and sister, that you will not: since (as
they will tell it to your father and brother) the declaration must needs
give advantage to spirits who have so little of that generosity for
which you are so much distinguished.

There never was a spirit in the world that would insult where it dared,
but it would creep and cringe where it dared not. Let me remind you of
a sentence of your own, the occasion for which I have forgotten: 'That
little spirits will always accommodate themselves to the temper of those
they would work upon: will fawn upon a sturdy-tempered person: will
insult the meek:'--And another given to Miss Biddulph, upon an occasion
you cannot forget:--'If we assume a dignity in what we say and do, and
take care not to disgrace by arrogance our own assumption, every body
will treat us with respect and deference.'

I remember that you once made an observation, which you said, you was
obliged to Mrs. Norton for, and she to her father, upon an excellent
preacher, who was but an indifferent liver: 'That to excel in theory,
and to excel in practice, generally required different talents; which
did not always meet in the same person.' Do you, my dear (to whom theory
and practice are the same thing in almost every laudable quality), apply
the observation to yourself, in this particular case, where resolution
is required; and where the performance of the will of the defunct is the
question--no more to be dispensed with by you, in whose favour it was
made, than by any body else who have only themselves in view by breaking
through it.

I know how much you despise riches in the main: but yet it behoves
you to remember, that in one instance you yourself have judged them
valuable--'In that they put it into our power to lay obligations; while
the want of that power puts a person under a necessity of receiving
favours--receiving them perhaps from grudging and narrow spirits, who
know not how to confer them with that grace, which gives the principal
merit to a beneficent action.'--Reflect upon this, my dear, and see how
it agrees with the declaration you have made to your aunt and sister,
that you would not resume your estate, were you to be turned out of
doors, and reduced to indigence and want. Their very fears that you will
resume, point out to you the necessity of resuming upon the treatment
you meet with.

I own, that (at first reading) I was much affected with your mother's
letter sent with the patterns. A strange measure however from a mother;
for she did not intend to insult you; and I cannot but lament that so
sensible and so fine a woman should stoop to so much art as that letter
is written with: and which also appears in some of the conversations
you have given me an account of. See you not in her passiveness, what
boisterous spirits can obtain from gentler, merely by teasing and
ill-nature?

I know the pride they have always taken in calling you a
Harlowe--Clarissa Harlowe, so formal and so set, at every word,
when they are grave or proudly solemn.--Your mother has learnt it of
them--and as in marriage, so in will, has been taught to bury her own
superior name and family in theirs. I have often thought that the same
spirit governed them, in this piece of affectation, and others of
the like nature (as Harlowe-Place, and so-forth, though not the elder
brother's or paternal seat), as governed the tyrant Tudor,* who marrying
Elizabeth, the heiress of the house of York, made himself a title to
a throne, which he would not otherwise have had (being but a base
descendant of the Lancaster line); and proved a gloomy and vile
husband to her; for no other cause, than because she had laid him under
obligations which his pride would not permit him to own.--Nor would the
unprincely wretch marry her till he was in possession of the crown, that
he might not be supposed to owe it to her claim.


     * Henry VII.


You have chidden me, and again will, I doubt not, for the liberties I
take with some of your relations. But my dear, need I tell you, that
pride in ourselves must, and for ever will, provoke contempt, and bring
down upon us abasement from others?--Have we not, in the case of a
celebrated bard, observed, that those who aim at more than their due,
will be refused the honours they may justly claim?--I am very much loth
to offend you; yet I cannot help speaking of your relations, as well as
of others, as I think they deserve. Praise or dispraise, is the reward
or punishment which the world confers or inflicts on merit or
demerit; and, for my part, I neither can nor will confound them in the
application. I despise them all, but your mother: indeed I do: and as
for her--but I will spare the good lady for your sake--and one
argument, indeed, I think may be pleaded in her favour, in the present
contention--she who has for so many years, and with such absolute
resignation, borne what she has borne to the sacrifice of her own will,
may think it an easier task than another person can imagine it, for her
daughter to give up hers. But to think to whose instigation all this is
originally owing--God forgive me; but with such usage I should have been
with Lovelace before now! Yet remember, my dear, that the step which
would not be wondered at from such a hasty-tempered creatures as me,
would be inexcusable in such a considerate person as you.

After your mother has been thus drawn in against her judgment, I am the
less surprised, that your aunt Hervey should go along with her; since
the two sisters never separate. I have inquired into the nature of the
obligation which Mr. Hervey's indifferent conduct in his affairs has
laid him under--it is only, it seems, that your brother has paid off
for him a mortgage upon one part of his estate, which the mortgagee was
about to foreclose; and taken it upon himself. A small favour (as he has
ample security in his hands) from kindred to kindred: but such a one, it
is plain, as has laid the whole family of the Herveys under obligation
to the ungenerous lender, who has treated him, and his aunt too (as
Miss Dolly Hervey has privately complained), with the less ceremony ever
since.

Must I, my dear, call such a creature your brother?--I believe I
must--Because he is your father's son. There is no harm, I hope, in
saying that.

I am concerned, that you ever wrote at all to him. It was taking too
much notice of him: it was adding to his self-significance; and a call
upon him to treat you with insolence. A call which you might have been
assured he would not fail to answer.

But such a pretty master as this, to run riot against such a man as
Lovelace; who had taught him to put his sword into his scabbard, when
he had pulled it out by accident!--These in-door insolents, who, turning
themselves into bugbears, frighten women, children, and servants, are
generally cravens among men. Were he to come fairly across me, and say
to my face some of the free things which I am told he has said of me
behind my back, or that (as by your account) he has said of our sex, I
would take upon myself to ask him two or three questions; although he
were to send me a challenge likewise.

I repeat, you know that I will speak my mind, and write it too. He is
not my brother. Can you say, he is yours?--So, for your life, if you
are just, you can't be angry with me: For would you side with a false
brother against a true friend? A brother may not be a friend: but a
friend will always be a brother--mind that, as your uncle Tony says!

I cannot descend so low, as to take very particular notice of the
epistles of these poor souls, whom you call uncles. Yet I love to divert
myself with such grotesque characters too. But I know them and love you;
and so cannot make the jest of them which their absurdities call for.

You chide me, my dear,* for my freedoms with relations still nearer and
dearer to you, than either uncles or brother or sister. You had better
have permitted me (uncorrected) to have taken my own way. Do not use
those freedoms naturally arise from the subject before us? And from whom
arises that subject, I pray you? Can you for one quarter of an hour
put yourself in my place, or in the place of those who are still more
indifferent to the case than I can be?--If you can--But although I have
you not often at advantage, I will not push you.


     * See Vol. I. Letter XXVIII.


Permit me, however, to subjoin, that well may your father love your
mother, as you say he does. A wife who has no will but his! But were
there not, think you, some struggles between them at first, gout out of
the question?--Your mother, when a maiden, had, as I have heard (and it
is very likely) a good share of those lively spirits which she liked
in your father. She has none of them now. How came they to be
dissipated?--Ah! my dear!--she has been too long resident in
Trophonius's cave, I doubt.*


     * Spectator, Vol. VIII. No. 599.


Let me add one reflection upon this subject, and so entitle myself to
your correction for all at once.--It is upon the conduct of those wives
(for you and I know more than one such) who can suffer themselves to
be out-blustered and out-gloomed of their own wills, instead of being
fooled out of them by acts of tenderness and complaisance.--I wish,
that it does not demonstrate too evidently, that, with some of the
sex, insolent controul is a more efficacious subduer than kindness or
concession. Upon my life, my dear, I have often thought, that many of us
are mere babies in matrimony: perverse fools when too much indulged and
humoured; creeping slaves, when treated harshly. But shall it be said,
that fear makes us more gentle obligers than love?--Forbid it, Honour!
Forbid it, Gratitude! Forbid it, Justice! that any woman of sense should
give occasion to have this said of her!

Did I think you would have any manner of doubt, from the style or
contents of this letter, whose saucy pen it is that has run on at this
rate, I would write my name at length; since it comes too much from my
heart to disavow it: but at present the initials shall serve; and I will
go on again directly.

A.H.




LETTER IV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORN. 10 O'CLOCK (MAR. 23).


I will postpone, or perhaps pass by, several observations which I had to
make on other parts of your letters; to acquaint you, that Mr. Hickman,
when in London, found an opportunity to inquire after Mr. Lovelace's
town life and conversation.

At the Cocoa-tree, in Pall-mall, he fell in with two of his intimates,
the one named Belton, the other Mowbray; both very free of speech,
and probably as free in their lives: but the waiters paid them great
respect, and on Mr. Hickman's inquiry after their characters, called
them men of fortune and honour.

They began to talk of Mr. Lovelace of their own accord; and upon some
gentlemen in the room asking, when they expected him in town, answered,
that very day. Mr. Hickman (as they both went on praising Lovelace)
said, he had indeed heard, that Mr. Lovelace was a very fine
gentleman--and was proceeding, when one of them, interrupting him,
said,--Only, Sir, the finest gentleman in the world; that's all.

And so he led them on to expatiate more particularly on his qualities;
which they were very fond of doing: but said not one single word in
behalf of his morals--Mind that also, in your uncle's style.

Mr. Hickman said, that Mr. Lovelace was very happy, as he understood, in
the esteem of the ladies; and smiling, to make them believe he did not
think amiss of it, that he pushed his good fortune as far as it would
go.

Well put, Mr. Hickman! thought I; equally grave and sage--thou seemest
not to be a stranger to their dialect, as I suppose this is. But I said
nothing; for I have often tried to find out this might sober man of my
mother's: but hitherto have only to say, that he is either very moral,
or very cunning.

No doubt of it, replied one of them; and out came an oath, with a Who
would not?--That he did as every young fellow would do.

Very true! said my mother's puritan--but I hear he is in treaty with a
fine lady--

So he was, Mr. Belton said--The devil fetch her! [vile brute!] for
she engrossed all his time--but that the lady's family ought to
be--something--[Mr. Hickman desired to be excused repeating what--though
he had repeated what was worse] and might dearly repent their usage of a
man of his family and merit.

Perhaps they may think him too wild, cries Hickman: and theirs is, I
hear, a very sober family--

SOBER! said one of them: A good honest word, Dick!--Where the devil has
it lain all this time?--D---- me if I have heard of it in this sense
ever since I was at college! and then, said he, we bandied it about
among twenty of us as an obsolete.

These, my dear, are Mr. Lovelace's companions: you'll be pleased to take
notice of that!

Mr. Hickman said, this put him out of countenance.

I stared at him, and with such a meaning in my eyes, as he knew how to
take; and so was out of countenance again.

Don't you remember, my dear, who it was that told a young gentleman
designed for the gown, who owned that he was apt to be too easily put
out of countenance when he came into free company, 'That it was a bad
sign; that it looked as if his morals were not proof; but that his good
disposition seemed rather the effect of accident and education, than
of such a choice as was founded upon principle?' And don't you know
the lesson the very same young lady gave him, 'To endeavour to stem and
discountenance vice, and to glory in being an advocate in all companies
for virtue;' particularly observing, 'That it was natural for a man to
shun or to give up what he was ashamed of?' Which she should be sorry
to think his case on this occasion: adding, 'That vice was a coward, and
would hide its head, when opposed by such a virtue as had presence of
mind, and a full persuasion of its own rectitude to support it.' The
lady, you may remember, modestly put her doctrine into the mouth of a
worthy preacher, Dr. Lewen, as she used to do, when she has a mind not
to be thought what she is at so early an age; and that it may give more
weight to any thing she hit upon, that might appear tolerable, was her
modest manner of speech.

Mr. Hickman, upon the whole, professed to me, upon his second recovery,
that he had no reason to think well of Mr. Lovelace's morals, from what
he heard of him in town; yet his two intimates talked of his being more
regular than he used to be. That he had made a very good resolution,
that of old Tom Wharton, was the expression, That he would never give
a challenge, nor refuse one; which they praised in him highly: that, in
short, he was a very brave fellow, and the most agreeable companion in
the world: and would one day make a great figure in his country; since
there was nothing he was not capable of--

I am afraid that his last assertion is too true. And this, my dear, is
all that Mr. Hickman could pick up about him: And is it not enough to
determine such a mind as yours, if not already determined?

Yet it must be said too, that if there be a woman in the world that can
reclaim him, it is you. And, by your account of his behaviour in the
interview between you, I own I have some hope of him. At least, this
I will say, that all the arguments he then used with you, seemed to
be just and right. And if you are to be his--But no more of that: he
cannot, after all, deserve you.




LETTER V

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 23.


An unexpected visitor has turned the course of my thoughts, and changed
the subject I had intended to pursue. The only one for whom I would have
dispensed with my resolution not to see any body all the dedicated day:
a visiter, whom, according to Mr. Hickman's report from the expectations
of his libertine friends, I supposed to be in town.--Now, my dear, have
I saved myself the trouble of telling you, that it was you too-agreeable
rake. Our sex is said to love to trade in surprises: yet have I, by
my promptitude, surprised myself out of mine. I had intended, you must
know, to run twice the length, before I had suffered you to know so much
as to guess who, and whether man or woman, my visiter was: but since you
have the discovery at so cheap a rate, you are welcome to it.

The end of his coming was, to engage my interest with my charming
friend; and he was sure that I knew all your mind, to acquaint him what
he had to trust to.

He mentioned what had passed in the interview between you: but could not
be satisfied with the result of it, and with the little satisfaction he
had obtained from you: the malice of your family to him increasing, and
their cruelty to you not abating. His heart, he told me, was in tumults,
for fear you should be prevailed upon in favour of a man despised by
every body.

He gave me fresh instance of indignities cast upon himself by your
uncles and brother; and declared, that if you suffered yourself to
be forced into the arms of the man for whose sake he was loaded with
undeserved abuses, you should be one of the youngest, as you would be
one of the loveliest widows in England. And that he would moreover call
your brother to account for the liberties he takes with his character to
every one he meets with.

He proposed several schemes, for you to choose some one of them, in
order to enable you to avoid the persecutions you labour under: One
I will mention--That you will resume your estate; and if you find
difficulties that can be no otherwise surmounted, that you will, either
avowedly or privately, as he had proposed to you, accept of Lady Betty
Lawrance's or Lord M.'s assistance to instate you in it. He declared,
that if you did, he would leave absolutely to your own pleasure
afterwards, and to the advice which your cousin Morden on his arrival
should give you, whether to encourage his address, or not, as you should
be convinced of the sincerity of the reformation which his enemies make
him so much want.

I had now a good opportunity to sound him, as you wished Mr. Hickman
would Lord M. as to the continued or diminished favour of the ladies,
and of his Lordship, towards you, upon their being acquainted with the
animosity of your relations to them, as well as to their kinsman. I laid
hold of the opportunity, and he satisfied me, by reading some passages
of a letter he had about him, from Lord M. That an alliance with
you, and that on the foot of your own single merit, would be the most
desirable event to them that could happen: and so far to the purpose of
your wished inquiry does his Lordship go in this letter, that he assures
him, that whatever you suffer in fortune from the violence of your
relations on his account, he and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty will join to
make it up to him. And yet that the reputation of a family so splendid,
would, no doubt, in a case of such importance to the honour of both,
make them prefer a general consent.

I told him, as you yourself I knew had done, that you were extremely
averse to Mr. Solmes; and that, might you be left to your own choice,
it would be the single life. As to himself, I plainly said, That you had
great and just objections to him on the score of his careless morals:
that it was surprising, that men who gave themselves the liberties he
was said to take, should presume to think, that whenever they took it
into their heads to marry, the most virtuous and worthy of the sex
were to fall to their lot. That as to the resumption, it had been very
strongly urged by myself, and would be still further urged; though you
had been hitherto averse to that measure: that your chief reliance and
hopes were upon your cousin Morden; and that to suspend or gain time
till he arrived, was, as I believed, your principal aim.

I told him, That with regard to the mischief he threatened, neither the
act nor the menace could serve any end but theirs who persecuted you; as
it would give them a pretence for carrying into effect their compulsory
projects; and that with the approbation of all the world; since he must
not think the public would give its voice in favour of a violent young
man, of no extraordinary character as to morals, who should seek to rob
a family of eminence of a child so valuable; and who threatened, if he
could not obtain her in preference to a man chosen by themselves, that
he would avenge himself upon them all by acts of violence.

I added, That he was very much mistaken, if he thought to intimidate you
by such menaces: for that, though your disposition was all sweetness,
yet I knew not a steadier temper in the world than yours; nor one more
inflexible, (as your friends had found, and would still further find, if
they continued to give occasion for its exertion,) whenever you thought
yourself in the right; and that you were ungenerously dealt with in
matters of too much moment to be indifferent about. Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, Mr. Lovelace, let me tell you, said I, timid as her foresight
and prudence may make her in some cases, where she apprehends dangers to
those she loves, is above fear, in points where her honour, and the true
dignity of her sex, are concerned.--In short, Sir, you must not think to
frighten Miss Clarissa Harlowe into such a mean or unworthy conduct as
only a weak or unsteady mind can be guilty of.

He was so very far from intending to intimidate you, he said, that he
besought me not to mention one word to you of what had passed between
us: that what he had hinted at, which carried the air of menace, was
owing to the fervour of his spirits, raised by his apprehensions of
losing all hope of you for ever; and on a supposition, that you were to
be actually forced into the arms of a man you hated: that were this to
be the case, he must own, that he should pay very little regard to the
world, or its censures: especially as the menaces of some of your family
now, and their triumph over him afterwards, would both provoke and
warrant all the vengeance he could take.

He added, that all the countries in the world were alike to him, but on
your account: so that, whatever he should think fit to do, were you lost
to him, he should have noting to apprehend from the laws of this.

I did not like the determined air he spoke this with: he is certainly
capable of great rashness.

He palliated a little this fierceness (which by the way I warmly
censured) by saying, That while you remain single, he will bear all the
indignities that shall be cast upon him by your family. But would
you throw yourself, if you were still farther driven, into any other
protection, if not Lord M.'s, or that of the ladies of his family, into
my mother's,* suppose; or would you go to London to private lodgings,
where he would never visit you, unless he had your leave (and from
whence you might make your own terms with your relations); he would be
entirely satisfied; and would, as he had said before, wait the effect of
your cousin's arrival, and your free determination as to his own fate.
Adding, that he knew the family so well, and how much fixed they were
upon their measures, as well as the absolute dependence they had upon
your temper and principles, that he could not but apprehend the worst,
while you remained in their power, and under the influence of their
persuasions and menaces.


     * Perhaps it will be unnecessary to remind the reader, that
     although Mr. Lovelace proposes (as above) to Miss Howe, that
     her fair friend should have recourse to the protection of
     Mrs. Howe, if farther driven; yet he had artfully taken
     care, by means of his agent in the Harlowe family, not only
     to inflame the family against her, but to deprive her of
     Mrs. Howe's, and of every other protection, being from the
     first resolved to reduce her to an absolute dependence upon
     himself. See Vol. I. Letter XXXI.


We had a great deal of other discourse: but as the reciting of the rest
would be but a repetition of many of the things that passed between you
and him in the interview between you in the wood-house, I refer myself
to your memory on that occasion.*


     * See Vol. I. Letter XXXVI.


And now, my dear, upon the whole, I think it behoves you to make
yourself independent: all then will fall right. This man is a violent
man. I should wish, methinks, that you should not have either him or
Solmes. You will find, if you get out of your brother's and sister's
way, what you can or cannot do, with regard to either.

If your relations persist in their foolish scheme, I think I will take
his hint, and, at a proper opportunity, sound my mother. Mean time, let
me have your clear opinion of the resumption, which I join with Lovelace
in advising. You can but see how your demand will work. To demand, is
not to litigate. But be your resolution what it will, do not by any
means repeat to them, that you will not assert your right. If they go on
to give you provocation, you may have sufficient reason to change your
mind: and let them expect that you will change it. They have not the
generosity to treat you the better for disclaiming the power they know
you have. That, I think, need not now be told you. I am, my dearest
friend, and ever will be,

Your most affectionate and faithful ANNA HOWE.




LETTER VI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDN. NIGHT, MARCH 22.


On the report made by my aunt and sister of my obstinacy, my assembled
relations have taken an unanimous resolution (as Betty tells me it
is) against me. This resolution you will find signified to me in the
inclosed letter from my brother, just now brought me. Be pleased to
return it, when perused. I may have occasion for it, in the altercations
between my relations and me.


*****


MISS CLARY,

I am commanded to let you know, that my father and uncles having heard
your aunt Hervey's account of all that has passed between her and you:
having heard from your sister what sort of treatment she has had from
you: having recollected all that has passed between your mother and
you: having weighed all your pleas and proposals: having taken into
consideration their engagements with Mr. Solmes; that gentleman's
patience, and great affection for you; and the little opportunity you
have given yourself to be acquainted either with his merit, or his
proposals: having considered two points more; to wit, the wounded
authority of a father; and Mr. Solmes's continued entreaties (little
as you have deserved regard from him) that you may be freed from a
confinement to which he is desirous to attribute your perverseness to
him [averseness I should have said, but let it go], he being unable to
account otherwise for so strong a one, supposing you told truth to your
mother, when you asserted that your heart was free; and which Mr. Solmes
is willing to believe, though nobody else does--For all these reasons,
it is resolved, that you shall go to your uncle Antony's: and you must
accordingly prepare yourself to do so. You will have but short notice of
the day, for obvious reasons.

I will honestly tell you the motive for your going: it is a double one;
first, That they may be sure, that you shall not correspond with any
body they do not like (for they find from Mrs. Howe, that, by some means
or other, you do correspond with her daughter; and, through her, perhaps
with somebody else): and next, That you may receive the visits of Mr.
Solmes; which you have thought fit to refuse to do here; by which means
you have deprived yourself of the opportunity of knowing whom and what
you have hitherto refused.

If after one fortnight's conversation with Mr. Solmes, and after
you have heard what your friends shall further urge in his behalf,
unhardened by clandestine correspondencies, you shall convince them,
that Virgil's amor omnibus idem (for the application of which I refer
you to the Georgic as translated by Dryden) is verified in you, as well
as in the rest of the animal creation; and that you cannot, or will
not forego your prepossession in favour of the moral, the virtuous,
the pious Lovelace, [I would please you if I could!] it will then be
considered, whether to humour you, or to renounce you for ever.

It is hoped, that as you must go, you will go cheerfully. Your uncle
Antony will make ever thing at his house agreeable to you. But indeed he
won't promise, that he will not, at proper times, draw up the bridge.

Your visiters, besides Mr. Solmes, will be myself, if you permit me that
honour, Miss Clary; your sister; and, as you behave to Mr. Solmes, your
aunt Hervey, and your uncle Harlowe; and yet the two latter will
hardly come neither, if they think it will be to hear your whining
vocatives.--Betty Barnes will be your attendant: and I must needs tell
you, Miss, that we none of us think the worse of the faithful maid for
your dislike of her: although Betty, who would be glad to oblige you,
laments it as a misfortune.

Your answer is required, whether you cheerfully consent to go? And your
indulgent mother bids me remind you from her, that a fortnight's visit
from Mr. Solmes, are all that is meant at present.

I am, as you shall be pleased to deserve, Yours, &c. JAMES HARLOWE, JUN.


So here is the master-stroke of my brother's policy! Called upon to
consent to go to my uncle Antony's avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's
visits!--A chapel! A moated-house!--Deprived of the opportunity of
corresponding with you!--or of any possibility of escape, should
violence be used to compel me to be that odious man's!*


     * These violent measures, and the obstinate perseverance of
     the whole family in them, will be the less wondered at, when
     it is considered, that all the time they were but as so many
     puppets danced upon Mr. Lovelace's wires, as he boasts, Vol.
     I. Letter XXXI.


Late as it was when I received this insolent letter, I wrote an answer
to it directly, that it might be ready for the writer's time of rising.
I inclose the rough draught of it. You will see by it how much his vile
hint from the Georgic; and his rude one of my whining vocatives, have
set me up. Besides, as the command to get ready to go to my uncle's is
in the name of my father and uncles, it is but to shew a piece of the
art they accuse me of, to resent the vile hint I have so much reason to
resent in order to palliate my refusal of preparing to go to my uncle's;
which refusal would otherwise be interpreted an act of rebellion by my
brother and sister: for it seems plain to me, that they will work but
half their ends, if they do not deprive me of my father's and uncles'
favour, even although it were possible for me to comply with their own
terms.


You might have told me, Brother, in three lines, what the determination
of my friends was; only, that then you would not have had room to
display your pedantry by so detestable an allusion or reference to the
Georgic. Give me leave to tell you, Sir, that if humanity were a branch
of your studies at the university, it has not found a genius in you for
mastering it. Nor is either my sex or myself, though a sister, I see
entitled to the least decency from a brother, who has studied, as it
seems, rather to cultivate the malevolence of his natural temper,
than any tendency which one might have hoped his parentage, if not his
education, might have given him to a tolerable politeness.

I doubt not, that you will take amiss my freedom: but as you have
deserved it from me, I shall be less and less concerned on that score,
as I see you are more and more intent to shew your wit at the expense of
justice and compassion.

The time is indeed come that I can no longer bear those contempts and
reflections which a brother, least of all men, is entitled to give. And
let me beg of you one favour, Sir:--It is this, That you will not give
yourself any concern about a husband for me, till I shall have the
forwardness to propose a wife to you. Pardon me, Sir; but I cannot
help thinking, that could I have the art to get my father of my side, I
should have as much right to prescribe for you, as you have for me.

As to the communication you make me, I must take upon me to say, That
although I will receive, as becomes me, any of my father's commands;
yet, as this signification is made by a brother, who has shewn of late
so much of an unbrotherly animosity to me, (for no reason in the world
that I know if, but that he believes he has, in me, one sister too much
for his interest,) I think myself entitled to conclude, that such a
letter as you have sent me, is all your own: and of course to declare,
that, while I so think it, I will not willingly, nor even without
violence, go to any place, avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's visits.

I think myself so much entitled to resent your infamous hint, and this
as well for the sake of my sex, as for my own, that I ought to declare,
as I do, that I will not receive any more of your letters, unless
commanded to do so by an authority I never will dispute; except in a
case where I think my future as well as present happiness concerned: and
were such a case to happen, I am sure my father's harshness will be less
owing to himself than to you; and to the specious absurdities of your
ambitious and selfish schemes.--Very true, Sir!

One word more, provoked as I am, I will add: That had I been thought as
really obstinate and perverse as of late I am said to be, I should not
have been so disgracefully treated as I have been--Lay your hand upon
your heart, Brother, and say, By whose instigations?--And examine what I
have done to deserve to be made thus unhappy, and to be obliged to style
myself

Your injured sister, CL. HARLOWE.


When, my dear, you have read my answer to my brother's letter, tell me
what you think of me?--It shall go!




LETTER VII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY MORNING, MARCH 23.


My letter has set them all in tumults: for, it seems, none of them went
home last night; and they all were desired to be present to give
their advice, if I should refuse compliance with a command thought so
reasonable as it seems this is.

Betty tells me, that at first my father, in a rage, was for coming up
to me himself, and for turning me out of his doors directly. Nor was he
restrained, till it was hinted to him, that that was no doubt my wish,
and would answer all my perverse views. But the result was, that my
brother (having really, as my mother and aunt insisted, taken wrong
measures with me) should write again in a more moderate manner: for
nobody else was permitted or cared to write to such a ready scribbler.
And, I having declared, that I would not receive any more of his
letters, without command from a superior authority, my mother was
to give it hers: and accordingly has done so in the following lines,
written on the superscription of his letter to me: which letter also
follows; together with my reply.


CLARY HARLOWE,

Receive and read this, with the temper that becomes your sex, your
character, your education, and your duty: and return an answer to it,
directed to your brother.

CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING.

Once more I write, although imperiously prohibited by a younger sister.
Your mother will have me do so, that you may be destitute of all
defence, if you persist in your pervicacy. Shall I be a pedant, Miss,
for this word? She is willing to indulge in you the least appearance of
that delicacy for which she once, as well as every body else, admired
you--before you knew Lovelace; I cannot, however, help saying that: and
she, and your aunt Hervey, will have it--[they would fain favour you,
if they could] that I may have provoked from you the answer they
nevertheless own to be so exceedingly unbecoming. I am now learning, you
see, to take up the softer language, where you have laid it down. This
then is the case:

They entreat, they pray, they beg, they supplicate (will either of
these do, Miss Clary?) that you will make no scruple to go to your uncle
Antony's: and fairly I am to tell you, for the very purpose mentioned
in my last--or, 'tis presumable, they need not entreat, beg, pray,
supplicate. Thus much is promised to Mr. Solmes, who is your advocate,
and very uneasy that you should be under constraint, supposing that your
dislike to him arises from that. And, if he finds that you are not to be
moved in his favour, when you are absolutely freed from what you call
a controul, he will forbear thinking of you, whatever it costs him.
He loves you too well: and in this, I really think, his understanding,
which you have reflected upon, is to be questioned.

Only for one fornight [sic], therefore, permit his visits. Your
education (you tell me of mine, you know) ought to make you incapable
of rudeness to any body. He will not, I hope, be the first man, myself
excepted, whom you ever treated rudely, purely because he is esteemed
by us all. I am, what you have a mind to make me, friend, brother,
or servant--I wish I could be still more polite, to so polite, to so
delicate, a sister.

JA. HARLOWE.

You must still write to me, if you condescend to reply. Your mother
will not be permitted to be disturbed with your nothing-meaning
vocatives!--Vocatives, once more, Madam Clary, repeats the pedant your
brother!


*****


TO JAMES HARLOWE, JUNIOR, ESQ.

Permit me, my ever-dear and honoured Papa and Mamma, in this manner to
surprise you into an audience, (presuming this will be read to you,)
since I am denied the honour of writing to you directly. Let me beg of
you to believe, that nothing but the most unconquerable dislike
could make me stand against your pleasure. What are riches, what are
settlements, to happiness? Let me not thus cruelly be given up to a man
my very soul is averse to. Permit me to repeat, that I cannot honestly
be his. Had I a slighter notion of the matrimonial duty than I have,
perhaps I might. But when I am to bear all the misery, and that for
life; when my heart is less concerned in this matter, than my soul;
my temporary, perhaps, than my future good; why should I be denied the
liberty of refusing? That liberty is all I ask.

It were easy for me to give way to hear Mr. Solmes talk for the
mentioned fortnight, although it is impossible for me, say what he
would, to get over my dislike to him. But the moated-house, the chapel
there, and the little mercy my brother and sister, who are to be there,
have hitherto shewn me, are what I am extremely apprehensive of. And why
does my brother say, my restraint is to be taken off, (and that too
at Mr. Solmes's desire,) when I am to be a still closer prisoner than
before; the bridge threatened to be drawn up; and no dear papa and mamma
near me, to appeal to, in the last resort?

Transfer not, I beseech you, to a brother and sister your own authority
over your child--to a brother and sister, who treat me with unkindness
and reproach; and, as I have too much reason to apprehend, misrepresent
my words and behaviour; or, greatly favoured as I used to be, it is
impossible I should be sunk so low in your opinions, as I unhappily am!

Let but this my hard, my disgraceful confinement be put an end to.
Permit me, my dear Mamma, to pursue my needleworks in your presence,
as one of your maidens; and you shall be witness, that it is not either
wilfulness or prepossession that governs me. Let me not, however, be put
out of your own house. Let Mr. Solmes come and go, as my papa pleases:
let me but stay or retire when he comes, as I can; and leave the rest to
Providence.

Forgive me, Brother, that thus, with an appearance of art, I address
myself to my father and mother, to whom I am forbidden to approach,
or to write. Hard it is to be reduced to such a contrivance! Forgive
likewise the plain dealing I have used in the above, with the nobleness
of a gentleman, and the gentleness due from a brother to a sister.
Although of late you have given me but little room to hope either for
your favour or compassion; yet, having not deserved to forfeit either, I
presume to claim both: for I am confident it is at present much in your
power, although but my brother (my honoured parents both, I bless God,
in being), to give peace to the greatly disturbed mind of

Your unhappy sister, CL. HARLOWE.


Betty tells me, my brother has taken my letter all in pieces; and has
undertaken to write such an answer to it, as shall confirm the wavering.
So, it is plain, that I should have moved somebody by it, but for this
hard-hearted brother--God forgive him!




LETTER VIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 23.


I send you the boasted confutation-letter, just now put into my
hands. My brother and sister, my uncle Antony and Mr. Solmes, are,
I understand, exulting over the copy of it below, as an unanswerable
performance.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

Once again, my inflexible Sister, I write to you. It is to let you know,
that the pretty piece of art you found out to make me the vehicle
of your whining pathetics to your father and mother, has not had the
expected effect.

I do assure you, that your behaviour has not been misrepresented--nor
need it. Your mother, who is solicitous to take all opportunities of
putting the most favourable constructions upon all you do, has been
forced, as you well know, to give you up, upon full trial. No need then
of the expedient of pursuing your needleworks in her sight. She cannot
bear your whining pranks: and it is for her sake, that you are not
permitted to come into her presence--nor will be, but upon her own
terms.

You had like to have made a simpleton of your aunt Hervey yesterday:
she came down from you, pleading in your favour. But when she was asked,
What concession she had brought you to? she looked about her, and knew
not what to answer. So your mother, when surprised into the beginning
of your cunning address to her and to your father, under my name, (for
I had begun to read it, little suspecting such an ingenious
subterfuge,)and would then make me read it through, wrung her hands, Oh!
her dear child, her dear child, must not be so compelled!--But when she
was asked, Whether she would be willing to have for her son-in-law the
man who bids defiance to her whole family; and who had like to have
murdered her son? And what concession she had gained from her dear child
to merit this tenderness? And that for one who had apparently deceived
her in assuring her that her heart was free?--Then could she look
about her, as her sister had done before: then was she again brought to
herself, and to a resolution to assert her authority [not to transfer
it, witty presumer!] over the rebel, who of late has so ungratefully
struggled to throw it off.

You seem, child, to have a high notion of the matrimonial duty; and I'll
warrant, like the rest of your sex, (one or two, whom I have the honour
to know, excepted,) that you will go to church to promise what you will
never think of afterwards. But, sweet child! as your worthy Mamma Norton
calls you, think a little less of the matrimonial, (at least, till you
come into that state,) and a little more of the filial duty.

How can you say, you are to bear all the misery, when you give so large
a share of it to your parents, to your uncles, to your aunt, to myself,
and to your sister; who all, for eighteen years of your life, loved you
so well?

If of late I have not given you room to hope for my favour or
compassion, it is because of late you have not deserved either. I know
what you mean, little reflecting fool, by saying, it is much in my
power, although but your brother, (a very slight degree of relationship
with you,) to give you that peace which you can give yourself whenever
you please.

The liberty of refusing, pretty Miss, is denied you, because we are all
sensible, that the liberty of choosing, to every one's dislike, must
follow. The vile wretch you have set your heart upon speaks this plainly
to every body, though you won't. He says you are his, and shall be his,
and he will be the death of any man who robs him of his PROPERTY. So,
Miss, we have a mind to try this point with him. My father, supposing he
has the right of a father in his child, is absolutely determined not to
be bullied out of that right. And what must that child be, who prefers
the rake to a father?

This is the light in which this whole debate ought to be taken. Blush,
then, Delicacy, that cannot bear the poet's amor omnibus idem!--Blush,
then, Purity! Be ashamed, Virgin Modesty! And, if capable of conviction,
surrender your whole will to the will of the honoured pair, to whom you
owe your being: and beg of all your friends to forgive and forget the
part you have of late acted.

I have written a longer letter than ever I designed to write to you,
after the insolent treatment and prohibition you have given me: and,
now I am commissioned to tell you, that your friends are as weary of
confining you, as you are of being confined. And therefore you must
prepare yourself to go in a very few days, as you have been told before,
to your uncle Antony's; who, notwithstanding you apprehensions, will
draw up his bridge when he pleases; will see what company he pleases
in his own house; nor will he demolish his chapel to cure you of your
foolish late-commenced antipathy to a place of divine worship.--The more
foolish, as, if we intended to use force, we could have the ceremony
pass in your chamber, as well as any where else.

Prejudice against Mr. Solmes has evidently blinded you, and there is a
charitable necessity to open your eyes: since no one but you thinks
the gentleman so contemptible in his person; nor, for a plain country
gentleman, who has too much solid sense to appear like a coxcomb, justly
blamable in his manners.--And as to his temper, it is necessary you
should speak upon fuller knowledge, than at present it is plain you can
have of him.

Upon the whole, it will not be amiss, that you prepare for your speedy
removal, as well for the sake of your own conveniency, as to shew your
readiness, in one point, at least, to oblige your friends; one of whom
you may, if you please to deserve it, reckon, though but a brother,

JAMES HARLOWE.

P.S. If you are disposed to see Mr. Solmes, and to make some excuses
to him for past conduct, in order to be able to meet him somewhere else
with the less concern to yourself for your freedoms with him, he shall
attend you where you please.

If you have a mind to read the settlements, before they are read to you
for your signing, they shall be sent you up--Who knows, but they will
help you to some fresh objections?--Your heart is free, you know--It
must--For, did you not tell your mother it was? And will the pious
Clarissa fib to her mamma?

I desire no reply. The case requires none. Yet I will ask you, Have you,
Miss, no more proposals to make?


*****


I was so vexed when I came to the end of this letter, (the postscript to
which, perhaps, might be written after the others had seen the letter,)
that I took up my pen, with an intent to write to my uncle Harlowe about
resuming my own estate, in pursuance of your advice. But my heart failed
me, when I recollected, that I had not one friend to stand by or
support me in my claim; and it would but the more incense them, without
answering any good end. Oh! that my cousin were but come!

Is it not a sad thing, beloved as I thought myself so lately by every
one, that now I have not one person in the world to plead for me, to
stand by me, or who would afford me refuge, were I to be under the
necessity of asking for it!--I who had the vanity to think I had as
many friends as I saw faces, and flattered myself too, that it was not
altogether unmerited, because I saw not my Maker's image, either in man,
woman, or child, high or low, rich or poor, whom, comparatively, I
loved not as myself.--Would to heaven, my dear, that you were married!
Perhaps, then, you could have induced Mr. Hickman to afford me
protection, till these storms were over-blown. But then this might have
involved him in difficulties and dangers; and that I would not have done
for the world.

I don't know what to do, not I!--God forgive me, but I am very
impatient! I wish--But I don't know what to wish, without a sin!--Yet I
wish it would please God to take me to his mercy!--I can meet with none
here--What a world is this!--What is there in it desirable? The good we
hope for, so strangely mixed, that one knows not what to wish for! And
one half of mankind tormenting the other, and being tormented themselves
in tormenting!--For here is this my particular case, my relations cannot
be happy, though they make me unhappy!--Except my brother and sister,
indeed--and they seem to take delight in and enjoy the mischief they
make.

But it is time to lay down my pen, since my ink runs nothing but gall.




LETTER IX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY MORNING, SIX O'CLOCK

Mrs. Betty tells me, there is now nothing talked of but of my going
to my uncle Antony's. She has been ordered, she says, to get ready to
attend me thither: and, upon my expressing my averseness to go, had the
confidence to say, That having heard me often praise the romanticness
of the place, she was astonished (her hands and eyes lifted up) that I
should set myself against going to a house so much in my taste.

I asked if this was her own insolence, or her young mistress's
observation?

She half-astonished me by her answer: That it was hard she could not say
a good thing, without being robbed of the merit of it.

As the wench looked as if she really thought she had said a good thing,
without knowing the boldness of it, I let it pass. But, to say the
truth, this creature has surprised me on many occasions with her
smartness: for, since she has been employed in this controuling office,
I have discovered a great deal of wit in her assurance, which I never
suspected before. This shews, that insolence is her talent: and that
Fortune, in placing her as a servant to my sister, had not done so
kindly by her as Nature; for that she would make a better figure as her
companion. And indeed I can't help thinking sometimes, that I myself was
better fitted by Nature to be the servant of both, than the mistress of
the one, or the servant of the other. And within these few months past,
Fortune has acted by me, as if she were of the same mind.


FRIDAY, TEN O'CLOCK

Going down to my poultry-yard, just now, I heard my brother and sister
and that Solmes laughing and triumphing together. The high yew-hedge
between us, which divides the yard from the garden, hindered them from
seeing me.

My brother, as I found, has been reading part, or the whole perhaps, of
the copy of his last letter--Mighty prudent, and consistent, you'll say,
with their views to make me the wife of a man from whom they conceal
not what, were I to be such, it would be kind in them to endeavour to
conceal, out of regard to my future peace!--But I have no doubt, that
they hate me heartily.

Indeed, you was up with her there, brother, said my sister. You need not
have bid her not to write to you. I'll engage, with all her wit, she'll
never pretend to answer it.

Why, indeed, said my brother, with an air of college-sufficiency, with
which he abounds, (for he thinks nobody writes like himself,) I believe
I have given her a choke-pear. What say you, Mr. Solmes?

Why, Sir, said he, I think it is unanswerable. But will it not
exasperate he more against me?

Never fear, Mr. Solmes, said my brother, but we'll carry our point, if
she do not tire you out first. We have gone too far in this method to
recede. Her cousin Morden will soon be here: so all must be over before
that time, or she'll be made independent of us all.

There, Miss Howe, is the reason given for their jehu-driving.

Mr. Solmes declared, that he was determined to persevere while my
brother gave him any hopes, and while my father stood firm.

My sister told my brother, that he hit me charmingly on the reason why
I ought to converse with Mr. Solmes: but that he should not be so smart
upon the sex, for the faults of this perverse girl.

Some lively, and, I suppose, witty answer, my brother returned; for he
and Mr. Solmes laughed outrageously upon it, and Bella, laughing too,
called him a naughty man: but I heard no more of what they said; they
walked on into the garden.

If you think, my dear, that what I have related did not again fire me,
you will find yourself mistaken when you read at this place the enclosed
copy of my letter to my brother; struck off while the iron was red hot.

No more call me meek and gentle, I beseech you.


TO MR. JAMES HARLOWE

FRIDAY MORNING.

SIR,

If, notwithstanding your prohibition, I should be silent, on occasion of
your last, you would, perhaps, conclude, that I was consenting to go to
my uncle Antony's upon the condition you mention. My father must do as
he pleases with his child. He may turn me out of his doors, if he thinks
fit, or give you leave to do it; but (loth as I am to say it) I should
think it very hard to be carried by force to any body's house, when I
have one of my own to go to.

Far be it from me, notwithstanding yours and my sister's provocations,
to think of my taking my estate into my own hands, without my father's
leave: But why, if I must not stay any longer here, may I not be
permitted to go thither? I will engage to see nobody they would not have
me see, if this favour be permitted. Favour I call it, and am ready to
receive and acknowledge it as such, although my grandfather's will has
made it a matter of right.

You ask me, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the postscript to your
letter, if I have not some new proposals to make? I HAVE (since you put
the question) three or four; new ones all, I think; though I will be
bold to say, that, submitting the case to any one person whom you have
not set against me, my old ones ought not to have been rejected. I think
this; why then should I not write it?--Nor have you any more reason to
storm at your sister for telling it you, (since you seem in your letter
to make it your boast how you turned my mother and my aunt Hervey
against me,) than I have to be angry with my brother, for treating me as
no brother ought to treat a sister.

These, then, are my new proposals.

That, as above, I may not be hindered from going to reside (under such
conditions as shall be prescribed to me, which I will most religiously
observe) at my grandfather's late house. I will not again in this place
call it mine. I have reason to think it a great misfortune that ever it
was so--indeed I have.

If this be not permitted, I desire leave to go for a month, or for what
time shall be thought fit, to Miss Howe's. I dare say my mother will
consent to it, if I have my father's permission to go.

If this, neither, be allowed, and I am to be turned out of my father's
house, I beg I may be suffered to go to my aunt Hervey's, where I will
inviolably observe her commands, and those of my father and mother.

But if this, neither, is to be granted, it is my humble request, that I
may be sent to my uncle Harlowe's, instead of my uncle Antony's. I mean
not by this any disrespect to my uncle Antony: but his moat, with his
bridge threatened to be drawn up, and perhaps the chapel there, terrify
me beyond expression, notwithstanding your witty ridicule upon me for
that apprehension.

If this likewise be refused, and if I must be carried to the
moated-house, which used to be a delightful one to me, let it be
promised me, that I shall not be compelled to receive Mr. Solmes's
visits there; and then I will as cheerfully go, as ever I did.

So here, Sir, are your new proposals. And if none of them answer
your end, as each of them tends to the exclusion of that ungenerous
persister's visits, be pleased to know, that there is no misfortune I
will not submit to, rather than yield to give my hand to the man to whom
I can allow no share in my heart.

If I write in a style different from my usual, and different from what
I wished to have occasion to write, an impartial person, who knew what I
have accidentally, within this hour past, heard from your mouth, and my
sister's, and a third person's, (particularly the reason you give
for driving on at this violent rate, to wit, my cousin Morden's
soon-expected arrival,) would think I have but too much reason for it.
Then be pleased to remember, Sir, that when my whining vocatives have
subjected me to so much scorn and ridicule, it is time, were it but to
imitate examples so excellent as you and my sister set me, that I should
endeavour to assert my character, in order to be thought less an alien,
and nearer of kin to you both, than either of you have of late seemed to
suppose me.

Give me leave, in order to empty my female quiver at once, to add, that
I know no other reason which you can have for forbidding me to reply to
you, after you have written what you pleased to me, than that you are
conscious you cannot answer to reason and to justice the treatment you
have given me.

If it be otherwise, I, an unlearned, an unlogical girl, younger by near
a third than yourself, will venture (so assured am I of the justice of
my cause) to put my fate upon an issue with you: with you, Sir, who have
had the advantage of an academical education; whose mind must have been
strengthened by observation, and learned conversation, and who, pardon
my going so low, have been accustomed to give choke-pears to those you
vouchsafe to write against.

Any impartial person, your late tutor, for instance, or the pious and
worthy Dr. Lewen, may be judge between us: and if either give it against
me, I will promise to resign to my destiny: provided, if it be given
against you, that my father will be pleased only to allow of my negative
to the person so violently sought to be imposed upon me.

I flatter myself, Brother, that you will the readier come into this
proposal, as you seem to have a high opinion of your talents for
argumentation; and not a low one of the cogency of the arguments
contained in your last letter. And if I can possibly have no advantage
in a contention with you, if the justice of my cause affords me not any
(as you have no opinion it will,) it behoves you, methinks, to shew to
an impartial moderator that I am wrong, and you not so.

If this be accepted, there is a necessity for its being carried on
by the pen; the facts being stated, and agreed upon by both; and the
decision to be given, according to the force of the arguments each shall
produce in support of their side of the question: for give me leave
to say, I know too well the manliness of your temper, to offer at a
personal debate with you.

If it be not accepted, I shall conclude, that you cannot defend your
conduct towards me; and shall only beg of you, that, for the future, you
will treat me with the respect due to a sister from a brother who would
be thought as polite as learned.

And now, Sir, if I have seemed to shew some spirit, not foreign to the
relation I have the honour to be to you, and to my sister; and which may
be deemed not altogether of a piece with that part of my character which
once, it seems, gained me every one's love; be pleased to consider to
whom, and to what it is owing; and that this part of that character was
not dispensed with, till it subjected me to that scorn, and to those
insults, which a brother, who has been so tenacious of an independence
voluntarily given up by me, and who has appeared so exalted upon it,
ought not to have shewn to any body, much less to a weak and defenceless
sister; who is, notwithstanding, an affectionate and respectful one, and
would be glad to shew herself to be so upon all future occasions; as she
has in every action of her past life, although of late she has met with
such unkind returns.

CL. HARLOWE


*****


See, my dear, the force, and volubility, as I may say, of passion; for
the letter I send you is my first draught, struck off without a blot or
erasure.


*****


FRIDAY, THREE O'CLOCK

As soon as I had transcribed it, I sent it down to my brother by Mrs.
Betty.

The wench came up soon after, all aghast, with a Laud, Miss! What have
you done?--What have you written? For you have set them all in a joyful
uproar!


*****


My sister is but this moment gone from me. She came up all in a flame;
which obliged me abruptly to lay down my pen: she ran to me--

O Spirit! said she; tapping my neck a little too hard. And is it come to
this at last--!

Do you beat me, Bella?

Do you call this beating you? only tapping you shoulder thus, said
she; tapping again more gently--This is what we expected it would come
to--You want to be independent--My father has lived too long for you--!

I was going to speak with vehemence; but she put her handkerchief
before my mouth, very rudely--You have done enough with your pen, mean
listener, as you are!--But know that neither your independent scheme,
nor any of your visiting ones, will be granted you. Take your course,
perverse one! Call in your rake to help you to an independence upon
your parents, and a dependence upon him!--Do so!--Prepare this
moment--resolve what you will take with you--to-morrow you go--depend
upon it to-morrow you go!--No longer shall you stay here, watching
and creeping about to hearken to what people say--'Tis determined,
child!--You go to-morrow--my brother would have come up to tell you so;
but I persuaded him to the contrary--for I know not what had become
of you, if he had--Such a letter! such an insolent, such a
conceited challenger!--O thou vain creature! But prepare yourself, I
say--to-morrow you go--my brother will accept of your bold challenge;
but it must be personal; and at my uncle Antony's--or perhaps at Mr.
Solmes's--

Thus she ran on, almost foaming with passion; till, quite out of
patience, I said, No more of your violence, Bella--Had I known in what
way you designed to come up, you should not have found my chamber-door
open--talk to your servant in this manner. Unlike you, as I bless God I
am, I am nevertheless your sister--and let me tell you, that I won't go
to-morrow, nor next day, nor next day to that--except I am dragged away
by violence.

What! not if your father or mother command it--Girl? said she, intending
another word, by her pause and manner before it came out.

Let it come to that, Bella; then I shall know what to say. But it shall
be from their own mouths, if I do--not from yours, nor you Betty's--And
say another word to me, in this manner, and be the consequence what it
may, I will force myself into their presence; and demand what I have
done to be used thus!

Come along, Child! Come along, Meekness--taking my hand, and leading me
towards the door--Demand it of them now--you'll find both your despised
parents together!--What! does your heart fail you?--for I resisted,
being thus insolently offered to be led, and pulled my hand from her.

I want not to be led, said I; and since I can plead your invitation, I
will go: and was posting to the stairs accordingly in my passion--but
she got between me and the door, and shut it--

Let me first, Bold one, said she, apprize them of your visit--for your
own sake let me--for my brother is with them. But yet opening it again,
seeing me shrink back--Go, if you will!--Why don't you go?--Why don't
you go, Miss?--following me to my closet, whither I retired, with my
heart full, and pulled the sash-door after me; and could no longer hold
in my tears.

Nor would I answer one word to her repeated aggravations, nor to her
demands upon me to open my door (for the key was on the inside); nor so
much as turn my head towards her, as she looked through the glass at me.
And at last, which vexed her to the heart, I drew the silk curtain, that
she should not see me, and down she went muttering all the way.

Is not this usage enough to provoke a rashness never before thought of?

As it is but too probable that I may be hurried away to my uncle's
without being able to give you previous notice of it; I beg that as soon
as you shall hear of such a violence, you would send to the usual place,
to take back such of your letters as may not have reached my hands, or
to fetch any of mine that may be there.

May you, my dear, be always happy, prays you CLARISSA HARLOWE.

I have received your four letters. But am in such a ferment, that I
cannot at present write to them.




LETTER X

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY NIGHT, MARCH 24.


I have a most provoking letter from my sister. I might have supposed she
would resent the contempt she brought upon herself in my chamber. Her
conduct surely can only be accounted for by the rage instigate by a
supposed rivalry.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

I am to tell you, that your mother has begged you off for the morrow:
but that you have effectually done your business with her, as well as
with every body else.

In your proposals and letter to your brother, you have shewn yourself so
silly, and so wise; so young, and so old; so gentle, and so obstinate;
so meek, and so violent; that never was there so mixed a character.

We all know of whom you have borrowed this new spirit. And yet the seeds
of it must be in your heart, or it could not all at once shew itself so
rampant. It would be doing Mr. Solmes a spite to wish him such a shy,
un-shy girl; another of your contradictory qualities--I leave you to
make out what I mean by it.

Here, Miss, your mother will not let you remain: she cannot have any
peace of mind while such a rebel of a child is so near her. Your aunt
Hervey will not take a charge which all the family put together cannot
manage. Your uncle Harlowe will not see you at his house, till you are
married. So, thanks to your own stubbornness, you have nobody that will
receive you but your uncle Antony. Thither you must go in a very
few days; and, when there, your brother will settle with you, in my
presence, all that relates to your modest challenge; for it is accepted,
I assure you. Dr. Lewen will possibly be there, since you make choice of
him. Another gentleman likewise, were it but to convince you, that he is
another sort of man than you have taken him to be. Your two uncles
will possibly be there too, to see that the poor, weak, and defenceless
sister has fair play. So, you see, Miss, what company your smart
challenge will draw together.

Prepare for the day. You'll soon be called upon. Adieu, Mamma Norton's
sweet child!

ARAB. HARLOWE.


*****


I transcribed this letter, and sent it to my mother, with these lines:


A very few words, my ever-honoured Mamma!

If my sister wrote the enclosed by my father's direction, or yours, I
must submit to the usage she gave me in it, with this only observation,
That it is short of the personal treatment I have received from her.
If it be of her own head--why then, Madam--But I knew that when I was
banished from your presence--Yet, till I know if she has or has not
authority for this usage, I will only write further, that I am

Your very unhappy child, CL. HARLOWE.


*****


This answer I received in an open slip of paper; but it was wet in one
place. I kissed the place; for I am sure it was blistered, as I may
say, by a mother's tear!--She must (I hope she must) have written it
reluctantly.


To apply for protection, where authority is defied, is bold. Your
sister, who would not in your circumstances have been guilty of your
perverseness, may allowably be angry at you for it. However, we have
told her to moderate her zeal for our insulted authority. See, if you
can deserve another behaviour, than that you complain of: which cannot,
however be so grievous to you, as the cause of it is to

Your more unhappy Mother.

How often must I forbid you any address to me!


*****


Give me, my dearest Miss Howe, your opinion, what I can, what I ought
to do. Not what you would do (pushed as I am pushed) in resentment or
passion--since, so instigated, you tell me, that you should have been
with somebody before now--and steps taken in passion hardly ever fail
of giving cause for repentance: but acquaint me with what you think
cool judgment, and after-reflection, whatever were to be the event, will
justify.

I doubt not your sympathizing love: but yet you cannot possibly feel
indignity and persecution so very sensibly as the immediate sufferer
feels them--are fitter therefore to advise me, than I am myself.

I will here rest my cause. Have I, or have I not, suffered or borne
enough? And if they will still persevere; if that strange persister
against an antipathy so strongly avowed, will still persist; say, What
can I do?--What course pursue?--Shall I fly to London, and endeavour to
hide myself from Lovelace, as well as from all my own relations, till
my cousin Morden arrives? Or shall I embark for Leghorn in my way to my
cousin? Yet, my sex, my youth, considered, how full of danger is this
last measure!--And may not my cousin be set out for England, while I
am getting thither?--What can I do?--Tell me, tell me, my dearest Miss
Howe, [for I dare not trust myself,] tell me, what I can do.

ELEVEN O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.

I have been forced to try to compose my angry passions at my
harpsichord; having first shut close my doors and windows, that I might
not be heard below. As I was closing the shutters of the windows, the
distant whooting of the bird of Minerva, as from the often-visited
woodhouse, gave the subject in that charming Ode to Wisdom, which does
honour to our sex, as it was written by one of it. I made an essay, a
week ago, to set the three last stanzas of it, as not unsuitable to my
unhappy situation; and after I had re-perused the Ode, those were
my lesson; and, I am sure, in the solemn address they contain to the
All-Wise and All-powerful Deity, my heart went with my fingers.

I enclose the Ode, and my effort with it. The subject is solemn; my
circumstances are affecting; and I flatter myself, that I have not been
quite unhappy in the performance. If it obtain your approbation, I shall
be out of doubt, and should be still more assured, could I hear it tried
by your voice and finger.



ODE TO WISDOM BY A LADY


     I.
     The solitary bird of night
     Thro' thick shades now wings his flight,
        And quits his time-shook tow'r;
     Where, shelter'd from the blaze of day,
     In philosophic gloom he lay,
        Beneath his ivy bow'r.

     II.
     With joy I hear the solemn sound,
     Which midnight echoes waft around,
        And sighing gales repeat.
     Fav'rite of Pallas! I attend,
     And, faithful to thy summons, bend
        At Wisdom's awful seat.

     III.
     She loves the cool, the silent eve,
     Where no false shows of life deceive,
        Beneath the lunar ray.
     Here folly drops each vain disguise;
     Nor sport her gaily colour'd dyes,
        As in the beam of day.

     IV.
     O Pallas! queen of ev'ry art,
     That glads the sense, and mends the heart,
        Blest source of purer joys!
     In ev'ry form of beauty bright,
     That captivates the mental sight
        With pleasure and surprise;

     V.
     To thy unspotted shrine I bow:
     Attend thy modest suppliant's vow,
        That breathes no wild desires;
     But, taught by thy unerring rules,
     To shun the fruitless wish of fools,
        To nobler views aspires.

     VI.
     Not Fortune's gem, Ambition's plume,
     Nor Cytherea's fading bloom,
        Be objects of my prayer:
     Let av'rice, vanity, and pride,
     Those envy'd glitt'ring toys divide,
        The dull rewards of care.

     VII.
     To me thy better gifts impart,
     Each moral beauty of the heart,
        By studious thought refin'd;
     For wealth, the smile of glad content;
     For pow'r, its amplest, best extent,
        An empire o'er my mind.

     VIII.
     When Fortune drops her gay parade.
     When Pleasure's transient roses fade,
        And wither in the tomb,
     Unchang'd is thy immortal prize;
     Thy ever-verdant laurels rise
        In undecaying bloom.

     IX.
     By thee protected, I defy
     The coxcomb's sneer, the stupid lie
        Of ignorance and spite:
     Alike contemn the leaden fool,
     And all the pointed ridicule
        Of undiscerning wit.

     X.
     From envy, hurry, noise, and strife,
     The dull impertinence of life,
        In thy retreat I rest:
     Pursue thee to the peaceful groves,
     Where Plato's sacred spirit roves,
        In all thy beauties drest.

     XI.
     He bad Ilyssus' tuneful stream
     Convey thy philosophic theme
        Of perfect, fair, and good:
     Attentive Athens caught the sound,
     And all her list'ning sons around
        In awful silence stood.

     XII.
     Reclaim'd her wild licentious youth,
     Confess'd the potent voice of Truth,
        And felt its just controul.
     The Passions ceas'd their loud alarms,
     And Virtue's soft persuasive charms
        O'er all their senses stole.

     XIII.
     Thy breath inspires the Poet's song
     The Patriot's free, unbiass'd tongue,
        The Hero's gen'rous strife;
     Thine are retirement's silent joys,
     And all the sweet engaging ties
        Of still, domestic life.

     XIV.
     No more to fabled names confin'd;
     To Thee supreme, all perfect mind,
        My thought direct their flight.
     Wisdom's thy gift, and all her force
     From thee deriv'd, Eternal source
        Of Intellectual Light!

     XV.
     O send her sure, her steady ray,
     To regulate my doubtful way,
        Thro' life's perplexing road:
     The mists of error to controul,
     And thro' its gloom direct my soul
        To happiness and good.

     XVI.
     Beneath her clear discerning eye
     The visionary shadows fly
        Of Folly's painted show.
     She sees thro' ev'ry fair disguise,
     That all but Virtue's solid joys,
        Is vanity and woe.

[Facsimile of the music to "The Ode to Wisdom" (verse 14).]




LETTER XI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY MIDNIGHT.


I have now a calmer moment. Envy, ambition, high and selfish resentment,
and all the violent passions, are now, most probably, asleep all around
me; and shall now my own angry ones give way to the silent hour, and
subside likewise?--They have given way to it; and I have made use of
the gentler space to re-peruse your last letters. I will touch upon
some passages in them. And that I may the less endanger the but-just
recovered calm, I will begin with what you write about Mr. Hickman.

Give me leave to say, That I am sorry you cannot yet persuade yourself
to think better, that is to say, more justly, of that gentleman, than
your whimsical picture of him shews you so; or, at least, than the
humourousness of your natural vein would make one think you do.

I do not imagine, that you yourself will say, he sat for the picture
you have drawn. And yet, upon the whole, it is not greatly to his
disadvantage. Were I at ease in my mind, I would venture to draw a much
more amiable and just likeness.

If Mr. Hickman has not that assurance which some men have, he has that
humility and gentleness which many want: and which, with the infinite
value he has for you, will make him one of the fittest husbands in the
world for a person of your vivacity and spirit.

Although you say I would not like him myself, I do assure you, if Mr.
Solmes were such a man as Mr. Hickman, in person, mind, and behaviour,
my friends and I had never disagreed about him, if they would not have
permitted me to live single; Mr. Lovelace (having such a character as
he has) would have stood no chance with me. This I can the more boldly
aver, because I plainly perceive, that of the two passions, love
and fear, this man will be able to inspire one with a much greater
proportion of the latter, than I imagine is compatible with the former,
to make a happy marriage.

I am glad you own, that you like no one better than Mr. Hickman. In a
little while, I make no doubt, you will be able, if you challenge
your heart upon it, to acknowledge, that you like not any man so well:
especially, when you come to consider, that the very faults you find in
Mr. Hickman, admirably fit him to make you happy: that is to say, if it
be necessary to your happiness, that you should have your own will in
every thing.

But let me add one thing: and that is this:--You have such a sprightly
turn, that, with your admirable talents, you would make any man in the
world, who loved you, look like a fool, except he were such a one as
Lovelace.

Forgive me, my dear, for my frankness: and forgive me, also, for so soon
returning to subject so immediately relative to myself, as those I now
must touch upon.

You again insist (strengthened by Mr. Lovelace's opinion) upon my
assuming my own estate [I cannot call it resuming, having never been
in possession of it]: and I have given you room to expect, that I will
consider this subject more closely than I have done before. I must
however own, that the reasons which I had to offer against taking
your advice were so obvious, that I thought you would have seen
them yourself, and been determined by them, against your own hastier
counsel.--But since this has not been so, and that both you and Mr.
Lovelace call upon me to assume my own estate, I will enter briefly into
the subject.

In the first place, let me ask you, my dear, supposing I were inclined
to follow your advice, Whom have I to support me in my demand? My uncle
Harlowe is one of my trustees--he is against me. My cousin Morden is the
other--he is in Italy, and very probably may be set against me too.
My brother has declared, that they are resolved to carry their points
before he arrives: so that, as they drive on, all will probably be
decided before I can have an answer from him, were I to write: and,
confined as I am, were the answer to come in time, and they did not like
it, they would keep it from me.

In the next place, parents have great advantages in every eye over the
child, if she dispute their pleasure in the disposing of her: and so
they ought; since out of twenty instances, perhaps two could not be
produced, when they were not in the right, the child in the wrong.

You would not, I am sure, have me accept of Mr. Lovelace's offered
assistance in such a claim. If I would embrace any other person's, who
else would care to appear for a child against parents, ever, till of
late, so affectionate?==But were such a protector to be found, what a
length of time would it take up in a course of litigation! The will and
the deeds have flaws in them, they say. My brother sometimes talks
of going to reside at The Grove: I suppose, with a design to make
ejectments necessary, were I to offer at assuming; or, were I to marry
Mr. Lovelace, in order to give him all the opposition and difficulty the
law would help him to give.

These cases I have put to myself, for argument-sake: but they are
all out of the question, although any body were to be found who would
espouse my cause: for I do assure you, I would sooner beg my bread, than
litigate for my right with my father: since I am convinced, that whether
the parent do his duty by the child or not, the child cannot be excused
from doing hers to him. And to go to law with my father, what a
sound has that! You will see, that I have mentioned my wish (as an
alternative, and as a favour) to be permitted, if I must be put out of
his house, to go thither: but not one step further can I go. And you see
how this is resented.

Upon the whole, then, what have I to hope for, but a change in my
father's resolution?--And is there any probability of that; such an
ascendancy as my brother and sister have obtained over every body;
and such an interest to pursue the enmity they have now openly avowed
against me?

As to Mr. Lovelace's approbation of your assumption-scheme, I wonder not
at. He very probably penetrates the difficulties I should have to bring
it to effect, without his assistance. Were I to find myself as free as I
would wish myself to be, perhaps Mr. Lovelace would stand a worse chance
with me than his vanity may permit him to imagine; notwithstanding the
pleasure you take in rallying me on his account. How know you, but
all that appears to be specious and reasonable in his offers; such as,
standing his chance for my favour, after I became independent, as I may
call it [by which I mean no more, than to have the liberty of refusing
for my husband a man whom it hurts me but to think of in that light];
and such as his not visiting me but by my leave; and till Mr. Morden
come; and till I am satisfied of his reformation;--How know you, I say,
that he gives not himself these airs purely to stand better in your
graces as well as mine, by offering of his own accord conditions which
he must needs think would be insisted on, were the case to happen?

Then am I utterly displeased with him. To threaten as he threatens; yet
to pretend, that it is not to intimidate me; and to beg of you not to
tell me, when he must know you would, and no doubt intended that you
should, is so meanly artful!--The man must think he has a frightened
fool to deal with.--I, to join hands with such a man of violence! my
own brother the man whom he threatens!--And what has Mr. Solmes done to
him?--Is he to be blamed, if he thinks a person would make a wife worth
having, to endeavour to obtain her?--Oh that my friends would but
leave me to my own way in this one point! For have I given the man
encouragement sufficient to ground these threats upon? Were Mr. Solmes a
man to whom I could but be indifferent, it might be found, that to have
spirit, would very little answer the views of that spirit. It is my
fortune to be treated as a fool by my brother: but Mr. Lovelace shall
find--Yet I will let him know my mind; and then it will come with a
better grace to your knowledge.

Mean time, give me leave to tell you, that it goes against me, in my
cooler moments, unnatural as my brother is to me, to have you, my dear,
who are my other self, write such very severe reflections upon him, in
relation to the advantage Lovelace had over him. He is not indeed your
brother: but remember, that you write to his sister.--Upon my word, my
dear Miss Howe, you dip your pen in gall whenever you are offended: and
I am almost ready to question, whether I read some of your expressions
against others of my relations as well as him, (although in my favour,)
whether you are so thoroughly warranted to call other people to account
for their warmth. Should we not be particularly careful to keep clear
of the faults we censure?--And yet I am so angry both at my brother and
sister, that I should not have taken this liberty with my dear friend,
notwithstanding I know you never loved them, had you not made so light
of so shocking a transaction where a brother's life was at stake: when
his credit in the eye of the mischievous sex has received a still deeper
wound than he personally sustained; and when a revival of the same
wicked resentments (which may end more fatally) is threatened.

His credit, I say, in the eye of the mischievous sex: Who is not
warranted to call it so; when it is re (as the two libertines his
companions gloried) to resolve never to give a challenge; and among whom
duelling is so fashionable a part of brutal bravery, that the man of
temper, who is, mostly, I believe, the truly brave man, is often at
a loss so to behave as to avoid incurring either a mortal guilt, or a
general contempt?

To enlarge a little upon this subject, May we not infer, that those who
would be guilty of throwing these contempts upon a man of temper, who
would rather pass by a verbal injury, than to imbrue his hands in blood,
know not the measure of true magnanimity? nor how much nobler it is to
forgive, and even how much more manly to despise, than to resent, an
injury? Were I a man, methinks, I should have too much scorn for a
person, who could wilfully do me a mean wrong, to put a value upon his
life, equal to what I put upon my own. What an absurdity, because a man
had done me a small injury, that I should put it in his power (at least,
to an equal risque) to do me, and those who love me, an irreparable
one!--Were it not a wilful injury, nor avowed to be so, there could not
be room for resentment.

How willingly would I run away from myself, and what most concerns
myself, if I could! This digression brings me back again to the occasion
of it--and that to the impatience I was in, when I ended my last
letter, for my situation is not altered. I renew, therefore, my former
earnestness, as the new day approaches, and will bring with it perhaps
new trials, that you will (as undivestedly as possible of favour or
resentment) tell me what you would have me do:--for, if I am obliged to
go to my uncle Antony's, all, I doubt, will be over with me. Yet how to
avoid it--that's the difficulty!

I shall deposit this the first thing. When you have it, lose no time, I
pray you, to advise (lest it be too late)

Your ever obliged CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SATURDAY, MARCH 25.


What can I advise you to do, my noble creature? Your merit is your
crime. You can no more change your nature, than your persecutors can
theirs. Your distress is owing to the vast disparity between you and
them. What would you have of them? Do they not act in character?--And to
whom? To an alien. You are not one of them. They have two dependencies
in their hope to move you to compliance.--Upon their impenetrableness
one [I'd give it a more proper name, if I dared]; the other, on the
regard you have always had for your character, [Have they not heretofore
owned as much?] and upon your apprehensions from that of Lovelace, which
would discredit you, should you take any step by his means to extricate
yourself. Then they know, that resentment and unpersuadableness are not
natural to you; and that the anger they have wrought you up to, will
subside, as all extraordinaries soon do; and that once married, you will
make the best of it.

But surely your father's son and eldest daughter have a view (by
communicating to so narrow a soul all they know of your just aversion to
him) to entail unhappiness for life upon you, were you to have the man
who is already more nearly related to them, than ever he can be to you,
although the shocking compulsion should take place.

As to that wretch's perseverance, those only, who know not the man,
will wonder at it. He has not the least delicacy. His principal view in
marriage is not to the mind. How shall those beauties be valued, which
cannot be comprehended? Were you to be his, and shew a visible want of
tenderness to him, it is my opinion, he would not be much concerned at
it. I have heard you well observe, from your Mrs. Norton, That a person
who has any over-ruling passion, will compound by giving up twenty
secondary or under-satisfactions, though more laudable ones, in order to
have that gratified.

I'll give you the substance of a conversation [no fear you can be made
to like him worse than you do already] that passed between Sir Harry
Downeton and this Solmes, but three days ago, as Sir Harry told it but
yesterday to my mother and me. It will confirm to you that what your
sister's insolent Betty reported he should say, of governing by fear,
was not of her own head.

Sir Harry told her, he wondered he should wish to obtain you so much
against you inclination as every body knew it would be, if he did.

He matter'd not that, he said: coy maids made the fondest wives: [A
sorry fellow!] It would not at all grieve him to see a pretty woman make
wry faces, if she gave him cause to vex her. And your estate, by the
convenience of its situation, would richly pay him for all he could bear
with your shyness.

He should be sure, he said, after a while, of your complaisance, if not
of your love: and in that should be happier than nine parts in ten of
his married acquaintance.

What a wretch is this!

For the rest, your known virtue would be as great a security to him, as
he could wish for.

She will look upon you, said Sir Harry, if she be forced to marry you,
as Elizabeth of France did upon Philip II. of Spain, when he received
her on his frontiers as her husband, who was to have been but her
father-in-law: that is, with fear and terror, rather than with
complaisance and love: and you will perhaps be as surly to her, as that
old monarch was to his young bride.

Fear and terror, the wretch, the horrid wretch! said, looked pretty in
a bride as well as in a wife: and, laughing, [yes, my dear, the hideous
fellow laughed immoderately, as Sir Harry told us, when he said it,] it
should be his care to perpetuate the occasion for that fear, if he could
not think he had the love. And, truly, he was of opinion, that if
LOVE and FEAR must be separated in matrimony, the man who made himself
feared, fared best.

If my eyes would carry with them the execution which the eyes of the
basilisk are said to do, I would make it my first business to see this
creature.

My mother, however, says, it would be a prodigious merit in you, if you
could get over your aversion to him. Where, asks she [as you have been
asked before], is the praise-worthiness of obedience, if it be only paid
in instance where we give up nothing?

What a fatality, that you have no better an option--either a Scylla or a
Charybdis.

Were it not you, I should know how (barbarously as you are used) to
advise you in a moment. But such a noble character to suffer from a
(supposed) rashness and indiscretion of such a nature, would, as I have
heretofore observed, be a wound to the sex.

While I was in hope, that the asserting of your own independence would
have helped you, I was pleased that you had one resource, as I thought.
But now, that you have so well proved, that such a step would not avail
you, I am entirely at a loss what to say.

I will lay down my pen, and think.


*****


I have considered, and considered again; but, I protest, I know no more
what to say now, than before. Only this: That I am young, like yourself;
and have a much weaker judgment, and stronger passions, than you have.

I have heretofore said, that you have offered as much as you ought, in
offering to live single. If you were never to marry, the estate they are
so loth should go out of their name, would, in time, I suppose, revert
to your brother: and he or his would have it, perhaps, much more
certainly this way, than by the precarious reversions which Solmes makes
them hope for. Have you put this into their odd heads, my dear?--The
tyrant word AUTHORITY, as they use it, can be the only objection against
this offer.

One thing you must consider, that, if you leave your parents, your duty
and love will not suffer you to justify yourself by an appeal against
them; and so you'll have the world against you. And should Lovelace
continue his wild life, and behave ungratefully to you, will not his
baseness seem to justify their cruel treatment of you, as well as their
dislike of him?

May heaven direct you for the best!--I can only say, that for my own
part, I would do any thing, go any where, rather than be compelled to
marry the man I hate; and (were he such a man as Solmes) must always
hate. Nor could I have borne what you have borne, if from father and
uncles, not from brother and sister.

My mother will have it, that after they have tried their utmost efforts
to bring you into their measures, and find them ineffectual, they will
recede. But I cannot say I am of her mind. She does not own, she has
any authority for this, but her own conjecture. I should otherwise have
hoped, that your uncle Antony and she had been in on one secret, and
that favourable to you. Woe be to one of them at least [to you uncle to
be sure I mean] if they should be in any other!

You must, if possible, avoid being carried to that uncle's. The man, the
parson, your brother and sister present!--They'll certainly there marry
you to the wretch. Nor will your newly-raised spirit support you in your
resistance on such an occasion. Your meekness will return; and you
will have nothing for it but tears [tears despised by them all] and
ineffectual appeals and lamentations: and these tears when the ceremony
is profaned, you must suddenly dry up; and endeavour to dispose of
yourself to such a humble frame of mind, as may induce your new-made
lord to forgive all your past declarations of aversion.

In short, my dear, you must then blandish him over with a confession,
that all your past behaviour was maidenly reserve only: and it will be
your part to convince him of the truth of his imprudent sarcasm, that
the coyest maids make the fondest wives. Thus will you enter the state
with a high sense of obligation to his forgiving goodness: and if you
will not be kept to it by that fear, by which he proposes to govern, I
am much mistaken.

Yet, after all, I must leave the point undetermined, and only to be
determined, as you find they recede from their avowed purpose, or
resolve to remove you to your uncle Antony's. But I must repeat my
wishes, that something may fall out, that neither of these men may call
you his!--And may you live single, my dearest friend, till some man
shall offer, that may be as worthy of you, as man can be!

But yet, methinks, I would not, that you, who are so admirably qualified
to adorn the married state, should be always single. You know I am
incapable of flattery; and that I always speak and write the sincerest
dictates of my heart. Nor can you, from what you must know of your
own merit (taken only in a comparative light with others) doubt my
sincerity. For why should a person who delight to find out and admire
every thing that is praise-worthy in another, be supposed ignorant of
like perfections in herself, when she could not so much admire them in
another, if she had them not herself? And why may not I give her those
praises, which she would give to any other, who had but half of her
excellencies?--Especially when she is incapable of pride and vain-glory;
and neither despises others for the want of her fine qualities, nor
overvalues herself upon them?--Over-values, did I say!--How can that be?

Forgive me, my beloved friend. My admiration of you (increased, as it
is, by every letter you write) will not always be held down in silence;
although, in order to avoid offending you, I generally endeavour to keep
it from flowing to my pen, when I write to you, or to my lips, whenever
I have the happiness to be in your company.

I will add nothing (though I could add a hundred things on account of
your latest communications) but that I am

Your ever affectionate and faithful ANNA HOWE.

I hope I have pleased you with my dispatch. I wish I had been able to
please you with my requested advice.

You have given new beauties to the charming Ode which you have
transmitted to me. What pity that the wretches you have to deal with,
put you out of your admirable course; in the pursuit of which, like the
sun, you was wont to cheer and illuminate all you shone upon!




LETTER XIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 26.


How soothing a thing is praise from those we love!--Whether conscious
or not of deserving it, it cannot but give us great delight, to see
ourselves stand high in the opinion of those whose favour we are
ambitious to cultivate. An ingenuous mind will make this farther use of
it, that if he be sensible that it does not already deserve the charming
attributes, it will hasten (before its friend finds herself mistaken) to
obtain the graces it is complimented for: and this it will do, as well
in honour to itself, as to preserve its friend's opinion, and justify
her judgment. May this be always my aim!--And then you will not only
give the praise, but the merit; and I shall be more worthy of that
friendship, which is the only pleasure I have to boast of.

Most heartily I thank you for the kind dispatch of your last favour. How
much am I indebted to you! and even to your honest servant!--Under what
obligations does my unhappy situation lay me!

But let me answer the kind contents of it, as well as I may.

As to getting over my disgusts to Mr. Solmes, it is impossible to
be done; while he wants generosity, frankness of heart, benevolence,
manners and every qualification that distinguishes the worthy man. O my
dear! what a degree of patience, what a greatness of soul, is required
in the wife, not to despise a husband who is more ignorant, more
illiterate, more low-minded than herself!--The wretch, vested with
prerogatives, who will claim rule in virtue of them (and not to permit
whose claim, will be as disgraceful to the prescribing wife as to the
governed husband); How shall such a husband as this be borne, were he,
for reasons of convenience and interest, even to be our CHOICE? But,
to be compelled to have such a one, and that compulsion to arise from
motives as unworthy of the prescribers as of the prescribed, who can
think of getting over an aversion so justly founded? How much easier to
bear the temporary persecutions I labour under, because temporary, than
to resolve to be such a man's for life? Were I to comply, must I not
leave my relations, and go to him? A month will decide the one, perhaps:
But what a duration of woe will the other be!--Every day, it is likely,
rising to witness to some new breach of an altar-vowed duty!

Then, my dear, the man seems already to be meditating vengeance against
me for an aversion I cannot help: for yesterday my saucy gaoleress
assured me, that all my oppositions would not signify that pinch of
snuff, holding out her genteel finger and thumb: that I must have Mr.
Solmes: that therefore I had not best carry my jest too far; for that
Mr. Solmes was a man of spirit, and had told HER, that as I should
surely be his, I acted very unpolitely; since, if he had not more mercy
[that was her word, I know not if it were his] than I had, I might have
cause to repent the usage I gave him to the last day of my life. But
enough of this man; who, by what you repeat from Sir Harry Downeton,
has all the insolence of his sex, without any one quality to make that
insolence tolerable.

I have receive two letters from Mr. Lovelace, since his visit to you;
which make three that I have not answered. I doubt not his being very
uneasy; but in his last he complains in high terms of my silence; not
in the still small voice, or rather style of an humble lover, but in a
style like that which would probably be used by a slighted protector.
And his pride is again touched, that like a thief, or eves-dropper, he
is forced to dodge about in hopes of a letter, and returns five miles
(and then to an inconvenient lodging) without any.

His letters and the copy of mine to him, shall soon attend you. Till
when, I will give you the substance of what I wrote him yesterday.

I take him severely to task for his freedom in threatening me, through
you, with a visit to Mr. Solmes, or to my brother. I say, 'That, surely,
I must be thought to be a creature fit to bear any thing; that violence
and menaces from some of my own family are not enough for me to bear, in
order to make me avoid him; but that I must have them from him too, if
I oblige those to whom it is both my inclination and duty to oblige in
every thing that is reasonable, and in my power.

'Very extraordinary, I tell him, that a violent spirit shall threaten to
do a rash and unjustifiable thing, which concerns me but a little, and
himself a great deal, if I do not something as rash, my character and
sex considered, to divert him from it.

'I even hint, that, however it would affect me, were any mischief to
happen on my own account, yet there are persons, as far as I know, who
in my case would not think there would be reason for much regret, were
such a committed rashness as he threatens Mr. Solmes with, to rid her of
two persons whom, had she never known, she had never been unhappy.'

This is plain-dealing, my dear: and I suppose he will put it into still
plainer English for me.

I take his pride to task, on his disdaining to watch for my letters; and
for his eves-dropping language: and say, 'That, surely, he has the less
reason to think so hardly of his situation; since his faulty morals
are the cause of all; and since faulty morals deservedly level all
distinction, and bring down rank and birth to the canaille, and to the
necessity which he so much regrets, of appearing (if I must descent to
his language) as an eves-dropper and a thief. And then I forbid him
ever to expect another letter from me that is to subject him to such
disgraceful hardships.

'As to the solemn vows and protestations he is so ready, upon all
occasions, to make, they have the less weight with me, I tell him,
as they give a kind of demonstration, that he himself, from his own
character, thinks there is reason to make them. Deeds are to me the
only evidence of intentions. And I am more and more convinced of
the necessity of breaking off a correspondence with a person, whose
addresses I see it is impossible either to expect my friends to
encourage, or him to appear to wish that they should think him worthy of
encouragement.

'What therefore I repeatedly desire is, That since his birth, alliances,
and expectations, are such as will at any time, if his immoral character
be not an objection, procure him at least equal advantages in a woman
whose taste and inclinations moreover might be better adapted to
his own; I insist upon it, as well as advise it, that he give up all
thoughts of me: and the rather, as he has all along (by his threatening
and unpolite behaviour to my friends, and whenever he speaks of them)
given me reason to conclude, that there is more malice in them, than
regard to me, in his perseverance.'

This is the substance of the letter I have written to him.

The man, to be sure, must have the penetration to observe, that my
correspondence with him hitherto is owing more to the severity I meet
with, than to a very high value for him. And so I would have him think.
What a worse than moloch deity is that, which expects an offering of
reason, duty, and discretion, to be made to its shrine!

Your mother is of opinion, you say, that at last my friends will relent.
Heaven grant that they may!--But my brother and sister have such an
influence over every body, and are so determined; so pique themselves
upon subduing me, and carrying their point; that I despair that they
will. And yet, if they do not, I frankly own, I would not scruple to
throw myself upon any not disreputable protection, by which I might
avoid my present persecutions, on one hand, and not give Mr. Lovelace
advantage over me, on the other--that is to say, were there manifestly
no other way left me: for, if there were, I should think the leaving my
father's house, without his consent, one of the most inexcusable actions
I could be guilty of, were the protection to be ever so unexceptionable;
and this notwithstanding the independent fortune willed me by my
grandfather. And indeed I have often reflected with a degree of
indignation and disdain, upon the thoughts of what a low, selfish
creature that child must be, who is to be reined in only by the hopes of
what a parent can or will do for her.

But notwithstanding all this, I owe it to the sincerity of friendship to
confess, that I know not what I should have done, had your advice been
conclusive any way. Had you, my dear, been witness to my different
emotions, as I read your letter, when, in one place, you advise me of
my danger, if I am carried to my uncle's; in another, when you own you
could not bear what I bear, and would do any thing rather than marry
the man you hate; yet, in another, to represent to me my reputation
suffering in the world's eye; and the necessity I should be under to
justify my conduct, at the expense of my friends, were I to take a rash
step; in another, insinuate the dishonest figure I should be forced to
make, in so compelled a matrimony; endeavouring to cajole, fawn upon,
and play the hypocrite with a man to whom I have an aversion; who would
have reason to believe me an hypocrite, as well from my former avowals,
as from the sense he must have (if common sense he has) of his own
demerits; the necessity you think there would be for me, the more averse
(were I capable of so much dissimulation) that would be imputable to
disgraceful motives; as it would be too visible, that love, either of
person or mind, could be neither of them: then his undoubted, his even
constitutional narrowness: his too probably jealousy, and unforgiveness,
bearing in my mind my declared aversion, and the unfeigned despights I
took all opportunities to do him, in order to discourage his address:
a preference avowed against him from the same motive; with the pride he
professes to take in curbing and sinking the spirits of a woman he had
acquired a right to tyrannize over: had you, I say, been witness of
my different emotions as I read; now leaning this way, now that; now
perplexed; now apprehensive; now angry at one, then at another; now
resolving; now doubting; you would have seen the power you have over me;
and would have had reason to believe, that, had you given your advice
in any determined or positive manner, I had been ready to have
been concluded by it. So, my dear, you will find, from these
acknowledgements, that you must justify me to those laws of friendship,
which require undisguised frankness of heart; although you justification
of me in that particular, will perhaps be at the expense of my prudence.

But, upon the whole, this I do repeat--That nothing but the last
extremity shall make me abandon my father's house, if they will permit
me to stay; and if I can, by any means, by any honest pretences, but
keep off my evil destiny in it till my cousin Morden arrives. As one
of my trustees, his is a protection, into which I may without discredit
throw myself, if my other friends should remain determined. And this
(although they seem too well aware of it) is all my hope: for, as
to Lovelace, were I to be sure of his tenderness, and even of his
reformation, must not the thought of embracing the offered protection of
his family, be the same thing, in the world's eye, as accepting of his
own?--Could I avoid receiving his visits at his own relations'? Must I
not be his, whatever, (on seeing him in a nearer light,) I should find
him out to be? For you know, it has always been my observation, that
very few people in courtship see each other as they are. Oh! my dear!
how wise have I endeavoured to be! How anxious to choose, and to avoid
every thing, precautiously, as I may say, that might make me happy,
or unhappy; yet all my wisdom now, by a strange fatality, is likely to
become foolishness!

Then you tell me, in your usual kindly-partial manner, what is expected
of me, more than would be of some others. This should be a lesson to me.
What ever my motives were, the world would not know them. To complain
of a brother's unkindness, that, indeed, I might do. Differences between
brothers and sisters, where interests clash, but too commonly arise:
but, where the severe father cannot be separated from the faulty
brother, who could bear to lighten herself, by loading a father?--Then,
in this particular case, must not the hatred Mr. Lovelace expresses
to every one of my family (although in return for their hatred of
him) shock one extremely? Must it not shew, that there is something
implacable, as well as highly unpolite in his temper?--And what creature
can think of marrying so as to be out of all hopes ever to be well with
her own nearest and tenderest relations?

But here, having tired myself, and I dare say you, I will lay down my
pen.


*****


Mr. Solmes is almost continually here: so is my aunt Hervey: so are my
two uncles. Something is working against me, I doubt. What an uneasy
state is suspense!--When a naked sword, too, seems hanging over one's
head!

I hear nothing but what this confident creature Betty throws out in
the wantonness of office. Now it is, Why, Miss, don't you look up your
things? You'll be called upon, depend upon it, before you are aware.
Another time she intimates darkly, and in broken sentences, (as if on
purpose to tease me,) what one says, what another; with their inquiries
how I dispose of my time? And my brother's insolent question comes
frequently in, Whether I am not writing a history of my sufferings?

But I am now used to her pertness: and as it is only through that that
I can hear of any thing intended against me, before it is to be put in
execution; and as, when she is most impertinent, she pleads a commission
for it; I bear with her: yet, now-and-then, not without a little of the
heart-burn.

I will deposit thus far. Adieu, my dear. CL. HARLOWE.


Written on the cover, after she went down, with a pencil:

On coming down, I found your second letter of yesterday's date.* I
have read it; and am in hopes that the enclosed will in a great measure
answer your mother's expectations of me.


     * See the next letter.


My most respectful acknowledgements to her for it, and for her very kind
admonitions.

You'll read to her what you please of the enclosed.




LETTER XIV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SAT. MARCH 25.


I follow my last of this date by command. I mentioned in my former my
mother's opinion of the merit you would have, if you could oblige your
friends against your own inclination. Our conference upon this subject
was introduced by the conversation we had had with Sir Harry Downeton;
and my mother thinks it of so much importance, that she enjoins me to
give you the particulars of it. I the rather comply, as I was unable in
my last to tell what to advise you to; and as you will in this recital
have my mother's opinion at least, and, perhaps, in hers what the
world's would be, were it only to know what she knows, and not so much
as I know.

My mother argues upon this case in a most discouraging manner for all
such of our sex as look forward for happiness in marriage with the man
of their choice.

Only, that I know, she has a side-view of her daughter; who, at the
same time that she now prefers no one to another, values not the man her
mother most regards, of one farthing; or I should lay it more to heart.

What is there in it, says she, that all this bustle is about? Is it such
a mighty matter for a young woman to give up her inclinations to oblige
her friends?

Very well, my mamma, thought I! Now, may you ask this--at FORTY, you
may. But what would you have said at EIGHTEEN, is the question?

Either, said she, the lady must be thought to have very violent
inclinations [And what nice young creature would have that supposed?]
which she could not give up; or a very stubborn will, which she would
not; or, thirdly, have parents she was indifferent about obliging.

You know my mother now-and-then argues very notably; always very warmly
at least. I happen often to differ from her; and we both think so well
of our own arguments, that we very seldom are so happy as to convince
one another. A pretty common case, I believe, in all vehement debatings.
She says, I am too witty; Angelice, too pert: I, That she is too wise;
that is to say, being likewise put into English, not so young as she has
been: in short, is grown so much into mother, that she has forgotten
she ever was a daughter. So, generally, we call another cause by
consent--yet fall into the old one half a dozen times over, without
consent--quitting and resuming, with half-angry faces, forced into a
smile, that there might be some room to piece together again: but go
a-bed, if bedtime, a little sullen nevertheless: or, if we speak, her
silence is broken with an Ah! Nancy! You are so lively! so quick! I wish
you were less like your papa, child!

I pay it off with thinking, that my mother has no reason to disclaim her
share in her Nancy: and if the matter go off with greater severity on
her side than I wish for, then her favourite Hickman fares the worse for
it next day.

I know I am a saucy creature. I know, if I do not say so, you will think
so. So no more of this just now. What I mention it for, is to tell you,
that on this serious occasion I will omit, if I can, all that passed
between us, that had an air of flippancy on my part, or quickness on my
mother's, to let you into the cool and cogent of the conversation.

'Look through the families, said she, which we both know, where the man
and the woman have been said to marry for love; which (at the time it
is so called) is perhaps no more than a passion begun in folly or
thoughtlessness, and carried on from a spirit of perverseness and
opposition [here we had a parenthetical debate, which I omit]; and see,
if they appear to be happier than those whose principal inducement to
marry has been convenience, or to oblige their friends; or ever whether
they are generally so happy: for convenience and duty, where observed,
will afford a permanent and even an increasing satisfaction (as well
at the time, as upon the reflection) which seldom fail to reward
themselves: while love, if love be the motive, is an idle passion' [idle
in ONE SENSE my mother cannot say; for love is as busy as a monkey, and
as mischievous as a school-boy]--'it is a fervour, that, like all other
fervours, lasts but a little while after marriage; a bow overstrained,
that soon returns to its natural bent.

'As it is founded generally upon mere notional excellencies, which
were unknown to the persons themselves till attributed to either by the
other; one, two, or three months, usually sets all right on both sides;
and then with opened eyes they think of each other--just as every body
else thought of them before.

'The lovers imaginaries [her own notable word!] are by that time gone
off; nature and old habits (painfully dispensed with or concealed)
return: disguises thrown aside, all the moles, freckles, and defects in
the minds of each discover themselves; and 'tis well if each do not sink
in the opinion of the other, as much below the common standard, as the
blinded imagination of both had set them above it. And now, said she,
the fond pair, who knew no felicity out of each other's company, are
so far from finding the never-ending variety each had proposed in
an unrestrained conversation with the other (when they seldom were
together; and always parted with something to say; or, on recollection,
when parted, wishing they had said); that they are continually on the
wing in pursuit of amusements out of themselves; and those, concluded my
sage mamma, [Did you think her wisdom so very modern?] will perhaps be
the livelier to each, in which the other has no share.'

I told my mother, that if you were to take any rash step, it would be
owing to the indiscreet violence of your friends. I was afraid, I said,
that these reflection upon the conduct of people in the married state,
who might set out with better hopes, were but too well grounded: but
that this must be allowed me, that if children weighed not these matters
so thoroughly as they ought, neither did parents make those allowances
for youth, inclination, and inexperience, which had been found necessary
to be made for themselves at their children's time of life.

I remembered a letter, I told her, hereupon, which you wrote a few
months ago, personating an anonymous elderly lady (in Mr. Wyerley's
day of plaguing you) to Miss Drayton's mother, who, by her severity and
restraints, had like to have driven the young lady into the very fault
against which her mother was most solicitous to guard her. And I dared
to say, she would be pleased with it.

I fetched the first draught of it, which at my request you obliged me
at the time; and read the whole letter to my mother. But the following
passage she made me read twice. I think you once told me you had not a
copy of this letter.

'Permit me, Madam, [says the personated grave writer,] to observe, That
if persons of your experience would have young people look forward, in
order to be wiser and better by their advice, it would be kind in them
to look backward, and allow for their children's youth, and natural
vivacity; in other words, for their lively hopes, unabated by time,
unaccompanied by reflection, and unchecked by disappointment. Things
appear to us all in a very different light at our entrance upon
a favourite party, or tour; when, with golden prospects, and high
expectations, we rise vigorous and fresh like the sun beginning its
morning course; from what they do, when we sit down at the end of our
views, tired, and preparing for our journey homeward: for then we take
into our reflection, what we had left out in prospect, the fatigues,
the checks, the hazards, we had met with; and make a true estimate of
pleasures, which from our raised expectations must necessarily have
fallen miserably short of what we had promised ourselves at setting out.
Nothing but experience can give us a strong and efficacious conviction
of this difference: and when we would inculcate the fruits of that upon
the minds of those we love, who have not lived long enough to find those
fruits; and would hope, that our advice should have as much force upon
them, as experience has upon us; and which, perhaps, our parents' advice
had not upon ourselves, at our daughter' time of life; should we not
proceed by patient reasoning and gentleness, that we may not harden,
where we would convince? For, Madam, the tenderest and most generous
minds, when harshly treated, become generally the most inflexible. If
the young lady knows her heart to be right, however defective her
head may be for want of age and experience, she will be apt to be very
tenacious. And if she believes her friends to be wrong, although perhaps
they may be only so in their methods of treating her, how much will
every unkind circumstance on the parent's part, or heedless one on the
child's, though ever so slight in itself, widen the difference! The
parent's prejudice in disfavour, will confirm the daughter's in favour,
of the same person; and the best reasonings in the world on either side,
will be attributed to that prejudice. In short, neither of them will be
convinced: a perpetual opposition ensues: the parent grows impatient;
the child desperate: and, as a too natural consequence, that falls
out which the mother was most afraid of, and which possibly had not
happened, if the child's passions had been only led, not driven.'

My mother was pleased with the whole letter; and said, It deserved to
have the success it met with. But asked me what excuse could be offered
for a young lady capable of making such reflections (and who at her time
of life could so well assume the character of one of riper years) if she
should rush into any fatal mistake herself?

She then touched upon the moral character of Mr. Lovelace; and how
reasonable the aversion of your reflections is to a man who gives
himself the liberties he is said to take; and who indeed himself denies
not the accusation; having been heard to declare, that he will do all
the mischief he can to the sex, in revenge for the ill usage and
broken vows of his first love, at a time when he was too young [his own
expression it seems] to be insincere.

I replied, that I had heard every one say, that the lady meant really
used him ill; that it affected him so much at the time, that he was
forced to travel upon it; and to drive her out of his heart, ran into
courses which he had ingenuousness enough himself to condemn: that,
however, he had denied that he had thrown out such menaces against the
sex when charged with them by me in your presence; and declared himself
incapable of so unjust and ungenerous a resentment against all, for the
perfidy of one.

You remember this, my dear, as I do your innocent observation upon it,
that you could believe his solemn asseveration and denial: 'For surely,
said you, the man who would resent, as the highest indignity that could
be offered to a gentleman, the imputation of a wilful falsehood, would
not be guilty of one.'

I insisted upon the extraordinary circumstances in your case;
particularizing them. I took notice, that Mr. Lovelace's morals were at
one time no objection with your relations for Arabella: that then much
was built upon his family, and more upon his part and learning, which
made it out of doubt, that he might be reclaimed by a woman of virtue
and prudence: and [pray forgive me for mentioning it] I ventured to
add, that although your family might be good sort of folks, as the world
went, yet no body but you imputed to any of them a very punctilious
concern for religion or piety--therefore were they the less entitled to
object to defect of that kind in others. Then, what an odious man, said
I, have they picked out, to supplant in a lady's affections one of the
finest figures of a man, and one noted for his brilliant parts, and
other accomplishments, whatever his morals may be!

Still my mother insisted, that there was the greater merit in your
obedience on that account; and urged, that there hardly ever was a very
handsome and a very sprightly man who made a tender and affectionate
husband: for that they were generally such Narcissus's, as to imagine
every woman ought to think as highly of them, as they did of themselves.

There was no danger from that consideration here, I said, because the
lady still had greater advantages of person and mind, than the man;
graceful and elegant, as he must be allowed to be, beyond most of his
sex.

She cannot endure to hear me praise any man but her favourite Hickman;
upon whom, nevertheless, she generally brings a degree of contempt which
he would escape, did she not lessen the little merit he has, by giving
him, on all occasions, more than I think he can deserve, and entering
him into comparisons in which it is impossible but he must be a
sufferer. And now [preposterous partiality!] she thought for her part,
that Mr. Hickman, bating that his face indeed was not so smooth, nor his
complexion quite so good, and saving that he was not so presuming and
so bold (which ought to be no fault with a modest woman) equaled Mr.
Lovelace at any hour of the day.

To avoid entering further into such an incomparable comparison, I said,
I did not believe, had they left you to your own way, and treated you
generously, that you would have had the thought of encouraging any man
whom they disliked--

Then, Nancy, catching me up, the excuse is less--for if so, must there
not be more of contradiction, than love, in the case?

Not so, neither, Madam: for I know Miss Clarissa Harlowe would prefer
Mr. Lovelace to all men, if morals--

IF, Nancy!--That if is every thing.--Do you really think she loves Mr.
Lovelace?

What would you have had me say, my dear?--I won't tell you what I did
say: But had I not said what I did, who would have believed me?

Besides, I know you love him!--Excuse me, my dear: Yet, if you deny it,
what do you but reflect upon yourself, as if you thought you ought not
to allow yourself in what you cannot help doing?

Indeed, Madam, said I, the man is worthy of any woman's love [if, again,
I could say]--But her parents--

Her parents, Nancy--[You know, my dear, how my mother, who accuses her
daughter of quickness, is evermore interrupting one!]

May take wrong measures, said I--

Cannot do wrong--they have reason, I'll warrant, said she--

By which they may provoke a young woman, said I, to do rash things,
which otherwise she would not do.

But, if it be a rash thing, [returned she,] should she do it? A prudent
daughter will not wilfully err, because her parents err, if they were to
err: if she do, the world which blames the parents, will not acquit the
child. All that can be said, in extenuation of a daughter's error in
this case, arises from a kind consideration, which Miss Clary's letter
to Lady Drayton pleads for, to be paid to her daughter's youth and
inexperience. And will such an admirable young person as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, whose prudence, as we see, qualifies her to be an advisor of
persons much older than herself, take shelter under so poor a covert?

Let her know, Nancy, out of hand, what I say; and I charge you to
represent farther to her, That let he dislike one man and approve
of another ever so much, it will be expected of a young lady of her
unbounded generosity and greatness of mind, that she should deny herself
when she can oblige all her family by so doing--no less than ten or a
dozen perhaps the nearest and dearest to her of all the persons in the
world, an indulgent father and mother at the head of them. It may be
fancy only on her side; but parents look deeper: And will not Miss
Clarissa Harlowe give up her fancy to her parents' judgment?

I said a great deal upon this judgment subject: all that you could wish
I should say; and all that your extraordinary case allowed me to say.
And my mother was so sensible of the force of it, that she charged me
not to write to you any part of my answer to what she said; but only
what she herself had advanced; lest, in so critical a case, it should
induce you to take measures which might give us both reason (me for
giving it, you for following it) to repent it as long as we lived.

And thus, my dear, have I set my mother's arguments before you. And the
rather, as I cannot myself tell what to advise you to do--you know best
your own heart; and what that will let you do.

Robin undertakes to deposit this very early, that you may have an
opportunity to receive it by your first morning airing.

Heaven guide and direct you for the best, is the incessant prayer of

Your ever affectionate ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY AFTERNOON


I am in great apprehension. Yet cannot help repeating my humble thanks
to your mother and you for your last favour. I hope her kind end is
answered by the contents of my last. Yet I must not think it enough to
acknowledge her goodness to me, with a pencil only, on the cover of a
letter sealed up. A few lines give me leave to write with regard to my
anonymous letter to Lady Drayton. If I did not at that time tell you, as
I believe I did, that my excellent Mrs. Norton gave me her assistance in
that letter, I now acknowledge that she did.

Pray let your mother know this, for two reasons: one, that I may not be
thought to arrogate to myself a discretion which does not belong to me;
the other, that I may not suffer by the severe, but just inference she
was pleased to draw; doubling my faults upon me, if I myself should act
unworthy of the advice I was supposed to give.

Before I come to what most nearly affects us all, I must chide you once
more, for the severe, the very severe things you mention of our family,
to the disparagement of their MORALS. Indeed, my dear, I wonder at
you!--A slighter occasion might have passed me, after I had written to
you so often to so little purpose, on this topic. But, affecting as
my own circumstances are, I cannot pass by, without animadversion, the
reflection I need not repeat in words.

There is not a worthier woman in England than my mother. Nor is my
father that man you sometimes make him. Excepting in one point, I know
not any family which lives more up to their duty, than the principals of
ours. A little too uncommunicative for their great circumstances--that
is all.--Why, then, have they not reason to insist upon unexceptionable
morals in a man whose sought-for relationship to them, by a marriage
in their family, they have certainly a right either to allow of, or to
disallow.

Another line or two, before I am engrossed by my own concerns--upon your
treatment of Mr. Hickman. Is it, do you think, generous to revenge upon
an innocent person, the displeasure you receive from another quarter,
where, I doubt, you are a trespasser too?--But one thing I could tell
him; and you have best not provoke me to it: It is this, That no woman
uses ill the man she does not absolutely reject, but she has it in her
heart to make him amends, when her tyranny has had its run, and he
has completed the measure of his services and patience. My mind is not
enough at ease to push this matter further.

I will now give you the occasion of my present apprehensions.

I had reason to fear, as I mentioned in mine of this morning, that a
storm was brewing. Mr. Solmes came home from church this afternoon with
my brother. Soon after, Betty brought me up a letter, without saying
from whom. It was in a cover, and directed by a hand I never saw before;
as if it were supposed that I would not receive and open it, had I known
from whom it came.

These are the contents:


*****


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SUNDAY, MARCH 26.

DEAREST MADAM,

I think myself a most unhappy man, in that I have never yet been able
to pay my respects to you with youre consent, for one halfe-hour. I
have something to communicat to you that concernes you much, if you be
pleased to admit me to youre speech. Youre honour is concerned in it,
and the honour of all youre familly. It relates to the designes of one
whom you are sed to valew more than he desarves; and to some of his
reprobat actions; which I am reddie to give you convincing proofes of
the truth of. I may appear to be interested in it: but, neverthelesse,
I am reddie to make oathe, that every tittle is true: and you will
see what a man you are sed to favour. But I hope not so, for your owne
honour.

Pray, Madam, vouchsafe me a hearing, as you valew your honour and
familly: which will oblidge, dearest Miss,

Your most humble and most faithful servant, ROGER SOLMES.

I wait below for the hope of admittance.


*****


I have no manner of doubt, that this is a poor device to get this man
into my company. I would have sent down a verbal answer; but Betty
refused to carry any message, which should prohibit his visiting me. So
I was obliged either to see him, or to write to him. I wrote therefore
an answer, of which I shall send you the rough draught. And now my heart
aches for what may follow from it; for I hear a great hurry below.


*****


TO ROGER SOLMES, ESQ.

SIR,

Whatever you have to communicate to me, which concerns my honour, may as
well be done by writing as by word of mouth. If Mr. Lovelace is any
of my concern, I know not that therefore he ought to be yours: for the
usage I receive on your account [I must think it so!] is so harsh, that
were there not such a man in the world as Mr. Lovelace, I would not wish
to see Mr. Solmes, no, not for one half-hour, in the way he is pleased
to be desirous to see me. I never can be in any danger from Mr.
Lovelace, (and, of consequence, cannot be affected by any of your
discoveries,) if the proposal I made be accepted. You have been
acquainted with it no doubt. If not, be pleased to let my friends know,
that if they will rid me of my apprehensions of one gentleman, I will
rid them of their of another: And then, of what consequence to them, or
to me, will it be, whether Mr. Lovelace be a good man, or a bad? And if
not to them, nor to me, I see not how it can be of any to you. But if
you do, I have nothing to say to that; and it will be a christian part
if you will expostulate with him upon the errors you have discovered,
and endeavour to make him as good a man, as, no doubt, you are yourself,
or you would not be so ready to detect and expose him.

Excuse me, Sir: but, after my former letter to you, and your ungenerous
perseverance; and after this attempt to avail yourself at the expense of
another man's character, rather than by your own proper merit; I see
not that you can blame any asperity in her, whom you have so largely
contributed to make unhappy.

CL. HARLOWE.


*****


SUNDAY NIGHT.

My father was for coming up to me, in great wrath, it seems; but was
persuaded to the contrary. My aunt Hervey was permitted to send me this
that follow.--Quick work, my dear!


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

NIECE,

Every body is now convinced, that nothing is to be done with you by way
of gentleness or persuasion. Your mother will not permit you to stay in
the house; for your father is so incensed by your strange letter to his
friend, that she knows not what will be the consequence if you do. So,
you are commanded to get ready to go to your uncle Antony's out of hand.

Your uncle thinks he has not deserved of you such an unwillingness as
you shew to go to his house.

You don't know the wickedness of the man for whose sake you think it
worth while to quarrel with all your friends.

You must not answer me. There will be no end of that.

You know not the affliction you give to every body; but to none more
than to

Your affectionate aunt, DOROTHY HERVEY.


*****


Forbid to write to my aunt, I took a bolder liberty. I wrote a few lines
to my mother; beseeching her to procure me leave to throw myself at my
father's feet, and hers, if I must go, (nobody else present,) to beg
pardon for the trouble I had given them both, and their blessings; and
to receive their commands as to my removal, and the time for it, from
their own lips.

'What new boldness this!--Take it back; and bid her learn to obey,' was
my mother's angry answer, with my letter returned, unopened.

But that I might omit nothing, that had an appearance of duty, I wrote
a few lines to my father himself, to the same purpose; begging, that he
would not turn me out of his house, without his blessing. But this, torn
in two pieces, and unopened, was brought me up again by Betty, with an
air, one hand held up, the other extended, the torn letter in her open
palm; and a See here!--What a sad thing is this!--Nothing will do but
duty, Miss!--Your papa said, Let her tell me of deeds!--I'll receive no
words from her. And so he tore the letter, and flung the pieces at my
head.

So desperate was my case, I was resolved not to stop even at this
repulse. I took my pen, and addressed myself to my uncle Harlowe,
enclosing that which my mother had returned unopened, and the torn
unopened one sent to my father; having first hurried off a transcript
for you.

My uncle was going home, and it was delivered to him just as he stepped
into his chariot. What may be the fate of it therefore I cannot know
till to-morrow.

The following is a copy of it:


TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.

MY DEAR AND EVER-HONOURED UNCLE,

I have nobody now but you, to whom I can apply, with hope, so much as
to have my humble addresses opened and read. My aunt Hervey has given me
commands which I want to have explained; but she has forbid me writing
to her. Hereupon I took the liberty to write to my father and mother.
You will see, Sir, by the torn one, and by the other, (both unopened,)
what has been the result. This, Sir, perhaps you already know: but, as
you know not the contents of the disgraced letters, I beseech you to
read them both, that you may be a witness for me, that they are not
filled with either complaints or expostulations, nor contain any thing
undutiful. Give me leave to say, Sir, that if deaf-eared anger will
neither grant me a hearing, nor, what I write a perusal, some time hence
the hard-heartedness may be regretted. I beseech you, dear, good Sir,
to let me know what is meant by sending me to my uncle Antony's house,
rather than to yours, or to my aunt Hervey's, or else-where? If it be
for what I apprehend it to be, life will not be supportable upon the
terms. I beg also to know, WHEN I am to be turned out of doors!--My
heart strongly gives me, that if once I am compelled to leave this
house, I never shall see it more.

It becomes me, however, to declare, that I write not this through
perverseness, or in resentment. God knows my heart, I do not! But the
treatment I apprehend I shall meet with, if carried to my other uncle's,
will, in all probability, give the finishing stroke to the distresses,
the undeserved distresses I will be bold to call them, of

Your once highly-favoured, but now unhappy, CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY MORNING, MARCH 27.


This morning early my uncle Harlowe came hither. He sent up the enclosed
very tender letter. It has made me wish I could oblige him. You will see
how Mr. Solmes's ill qualities are glossed over in it. What blemishes
dies affection hide!--But perhaps they may say to me, What faults does
antipathy bring to light!

Be pleased to send me back this letter of my uncle by the first return.


SUNDAY NIGHT, OR RATHER MINDAY MORNING.

I must answer you, though against my own resolution. Every body loves
you; and you know they do. The very ground you walk upon is dear to most
of us. But how can we resolve to see you? There is no standing against
your looks and language. It is our loves makes us decline to see you.
How can we, when you are resolved not to do what we are resolved you
shall do? I never, for my part, loved any creature, as I loved you from
your infancy till now. And indeed, as I have often said, never was there
a young creature so deserving of our love. But what is come to you now!
Alas! alas! my dear kinswoman, how you fail in the trial!

I have read the letters you enclosed. At a proper time, I may shew them
to my brother and sister: but they will receive nothing from you at
present.

For my part, I could not read your letter to me, without being unmanned.
How can you be so unmoved yourself, yet so able to move every body
else? How could you send such a letter to Mr. Solmes? Fie upon you! How
strangely are you altered!

Then to treat your brother and sister as you did, that they don't care
to write to you, or to see you! Don't you know where it is written, That
soft answers turn away wrath? But if you will trust to you sharp-pointed
wit, you may wound. Yet a club will beat down a sword: And how can you
expect that they who are hurt by you will not hurt you again? Was this
the way you used to take to make us all adore you as we did?--No, it
was your gentleness of heart and manners, that made every body, even
strangers, at first sight, treat you as a lady, and call you a lady,
though not born one, while your elder sister had no such distinctions
paid her. If you were envied, why should you sharpen envy, and file up
its teeth to an edge?--You see I write like an impartial man, and as one
that loves you still.

But since you have displayed your talents, and spared nobody, and moved
every body, without being moved, you have but made us stand the closer
and firmer together. This is what I likened to an embattled phalanx,
once before. Your aunt Hervey forbids your writing for the same reason
that I must not countenance it. We are all afraid to see you, because we
know we shall be made as so many fools. Nay, your mother is so afraid
of you, that once or twice, when she thought you were coming to force
yourself into her presence, she shut the door, and locked herself in,
because she knew she must not see you upon your terms, and you are
resolved you will not see her upon hers.

Resolves but to oblige us all, my dearest Miss Clary, and you shall see
how we will clasp you every one by turns to our rejoicing hearts. If the
one man has not the wit, and the parts, and the person, of the other, no
one breathing has a worse heart than that other: and is not the love
of all your friends, and a sober man (if he be not so polished) to be
preferred to a debauchee, though ever so fine a man to look at? You have
such talents that you will be adored by the one: but the other has as
much advantage in those respects, as you have yourself, and will not set
by them one straw: for husbands are sometimes jealous of their authority
with witty wives. You will have in one, a man of virtue. Had you not
been so rudely affronting to him, he would have made your ears tingle
with what he could have told you of the other.

Come, my dear niece, let me have the honour of doing with you what no
body else yet has been able to do. Your father, mother, and I, will
divide the pleasure, and the honour, I will again call it, between us;
and all past offences shall be forgiven; and Mr. Solmes, we will engage,
shall take nothing amiss hereafter, of what has passed.

He knows, he says, what a jewel that man will have, who can obtain your
favour; and he will think light of all he has suffered, or shall suffer,
in obtaining you.

Dear, sweet creature, oblige us: and oblige us with a grace. It must be
done, whether with a grace or not. I do assure you it must. You must not
conquer father, mother, uncles, every body: depend upon that.

I have set up half the night to write this. You do not know how I
am touched at reading yours, and writing this. Yet will I be at
Harlowe-place early in the morning. So, upon reading this, if you will
oblige us all, send me word to come up to your apartment: and I will
lead you down, and present you to the embraces of every one: and you
will then see, you have more of a brother and sister in them both, than
of late your prejudices will let you think you have. This from one who
used to love to style himself,

Your paternal uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.


*****


In about an hour after this kind letter was given me, my uncle sent up
to know, if he should be a welcome visiter, upon the terms mentioned in
his letter? He bid Betty bring him down a verbal answer: a written one,
he said, would be a bad sign: and he bid her therefore not to bring a
letter. But I had just finished the enclosed transcription of one I had
been writing. She made a difficulty to carry it; but was prevailed upon
to oblige me by a token which these Mrs. Betty's cannot withstand.


DEAR AND HONOURED SIR,

How you rejoice me by your condescending goodness!--So kind, so paternal
a letter!--so soothing to a wounded heart; and of late what I have been
so little used to!--How am I affected with it! Tell me not, dear Sir, of
my way of writing: your letter has more moved me, than I have been able
to move any body!--It has made me wish, with all my heart, that I could
entitle myself to be visited upon your own terms; and to be led down to
my father and mother by so good and so kind an uncle.

I will tell you, dearest Uncle, what I will do to make my peace. I have
no doubt that Mr. Solmes, upon consideration, would greatly prefer my
sister to such a strange averse creature as me. His chief, or one of his
chief motives in his address to me, is, as I have reason to believe, the
contiguity of my grandfather's estate to his own. I will resign it; for
ever I will resign it: and the resignation must be good, because I will
never marry at all. I will make it over to my sister, and her heirs for
ever. I shall have no heirs, but my brother and her; and I will receive,
as of my father's bounty, such an annuity (not in lieu of the estate,
but as of his bounty) as he shall be pleased to grant me, if it be
ever so small: and whenever I disoblige him, he to withdraw it, at his
pleasure.

Will this not be accepted?--Surely it must--surely it will!--I beg of
you, dearest Sir, to propose it; and second it with your interest. This
will answer every end. My sister has a high opinion of Mr. Solmes. I
never can have any in the light he is proposed to me. But as my sister's
husband, he will be always entitled to my respect; and shall have it.

If this be accepted, grant me, Sir, the honour of a visit; and do me
then the inexpressible pleasure of leading me down to the feet of my
honoured parents, and they shall find me the most dutiful of children;
and to the arms of my brother and sister, and they shall find me the
most obliging and most affectionate of sisters.

I wait, Sir, for your answer to this proposal, made with the whole heart
of

Your dutiful and most obliged niece, CL. HARLOWE.


MONDAY NOON.

I hope this will be accepted: for Betty tells me, that my uncle Antony
and my aunt Hervey are sent for; and not Mr. Solmes; which I look upon
as a favourable circumstance. With what cheerfulness will I assign over
this envied estate!--What a much more valuable consideration shall I
part with it for!--The love and favour of all my relations! That love
and favour, which I used for eighteen years together to rejoice in, and
be distinguished by!--And what a charming pretence will this afford me
of breaking with Mr. Lovelace! And how easily will it possibly make him
to part with me!

I found this morning, in the usual place, a letter from him, in answer,
I suppose, to mine of Friday, which I deposited not till Saturday. But
I have not opened it; nor will I, till I see what effect this new offer
will have.

Let me but be permitted to avoid the man I hate; and I will give up with
cheerfulness the man I could prefer. To renounce the one, were I really
to value him as much as you seem to imagine, can give but a temporary
concern, which time and discretion will alleviate. This is a sacrifice
which a child owes to parents and friends, if they insist upon its being
made. But the other, to marry a man one cannot endure, is not only a
dishonest thing, as to the man; but it is enough to make a creature who
wishes to be a good wife, a bad or indifferent one, as I once wrote to
the man himself: and then she can hardly be either a good mistress, or
a good friend; or any thing but a discredit to her family, and a bad
example to all around her.

Methinks I am loth, in the suspense I am in at present, to deposit
this, because it will be leaving you in one as great: but having been
prevented by Betty's officiousness twice, I will now go down to my
little poultry; and, if I have an opportunity, will leave it in the
usual place, where I hope to find something from you.




LETTER XVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE MONDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 27.


I have deposited my narrative down to this day noon; but I hope soon to
follow it with another letter, that I may keep you as little a while as
possible in that suspense which I am so much affected by at this moment:
for my heart is disturbed at ever foot I hear stir; and at every door
below that I hear open or shut.

They have been all assembled some time, and are in close debate I
believe: But can there be room for long debate upon a proposal, which,
if accepted, will so effectually answer all their views?--Can they
insist a moment longer upon my having Mr. Solmes, when they see what
sacrifices I am ready to make, to be freed from his addresses?--Oh! but
I suppose the struggle is, first, with Bella's nicety, to persuade her
to accept of the estate, and of the husband; and next, with her pride,
to take her sister's refusals, as she once phrased it!--Or, it may
be, my brother is insisting upon equivalents for his reversion in the
estate: and these sort of things take up but too much the attention of
some of our family. To these, no doubt, one or both, it must be owing,
that my proposal admits of so much consideration.

I want, methinks, to see what Mr. Lovelace, in his letter, says. But I
will deny myself this piece of curiosity till that which is raised by my
present suspense is answered.--Excuse me, my dear, that I thus trouble
you with my uncertainties: but I have no employment, nor heart, if I
had, to pursue any other but what my pen affords me.


MONDAY EVENING.

Would you believe it?--Betty, by anticipation, tells me, that I am to be
refused. I am 'a vile, artful creature. Every body is too good to me.
My uncle Harlowe has been taken in, that's the phrase. They know how
it would be, if he either wrote to me, or saw me. He has, however, been
made ashamed to be so wrought upon. A pretty thing truly in the eye of
the world it would be, were they to take me at my word! It would look
as if they had treated me thus hardly, as I think it, for this very
purpose. My peculiars, particularly Miss Howe, would give it that
turn; and I myself could mean nothing by it, but to see if it would be
accepted in order to strengthen my own arguments against Mr. Solmes. It
was amazing, that it could admit of a moment's deliberation: that any
thing could be supposed to be done in it. It was equally against law and
equity: and a fine security Miss Bella would have, or Mr. Solmes, when I
could resume it when I would!--My brother and she my heirs! O the artful
creature!--I to resolve to live single, when Lovelace is so sure of
me--and every where declares as much!--and can whenever he pleases,
if my husband, claim under the will!--Then the insolence--the
confidence--[as Betty mincingly told me, that one said; you may easily
guess who] that she, who was so justly in disgrace for downright
rebellion, should pretend to prescribe to the whole family!--Should name
a husband for her elder sister!--What a triumph would her obstinacy go
away with, to delegate her commands, not as from a prison, as she called
it, but as from her throne, to her elders and betters; and to her father
and mother too!--Amazing, perfectly amazing, that any body could argue
upon such a proposal as this! It was a master-stroke of finesse--It was
ME in perfection!--Surely my uncle Harlowe will never again be so taken
in!'

All this was the readier told me, because it was against me, and would
tease and vex me. But as some of this fine recapitulation implied, that
somebody spoke up for me. I was curious to know who it was. But Betty
would not tell me, for fear I should have the consolation to find that
all were not against me.

But do you not see, my dear, what a sad creature she is whom you honour
with your friendship?--You could not doubt your influence over me: Why
did you not take the friendly liberty I have always taken with you,
and tell me my faults, and what a specious hypocrite I am? For, if my
brother and sister could make such discoveries, how is it possible, that
faults to enormous [you could see others, you thought, of a more secret
nature!] could escape you penetrating eye?

Well, but now, it seems, they are debating how and by whom to answer me:
for they know not, nor are they to know, that Mrs. Betty has told me all
these fine things. One desires to be excused, it seems: another chooses
not to have any thing to say to me: another has enough of me: and of
writing to so ready a scribbler, there will be no end.

Thus are those imputed qualifications, which used so lately to gain me
applause, now become my crimes: so much do disgust and anger alter the
property of things.

The result of their debate, I suppose, will somehow or other be
communicated to me by-and-by. But let me tell you, my dear, that I am
made so desperate, that I am afraid to open Mr. Lovelace's letter,
lest, in the humour I am in, I should do something (if I find it not
exceptionable) that may give me repentance as long as I live.


MONDAY NIGHT.

This moment the following letter is brought me by Betty.


MONDAY, 5 O'CLOCK

MISS CUNNING-ONE,

Your fine new proposal is thought unworthy of a particular answer. Your
uncle Harlowe is ashamed to be so taken in. Have you no new fetch for
your uncle Antony? Go round with us, child, now your hand's in. But I
was bid to write only one line, that you might not complain, as you
did of your worthy sister, for the freedoms you provoked: It is
this--Prepare yourself. To-morrow you go to my uncle Antony's. That's
all, child.

JAMES HARLOWE.


I was vexed to the heart at this: and immediately, in the warmth of
resentment, wrote the enclosed to my uncle Harlowe; who it seems stays
here this night.


TO JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. MONDAY NIGHT.

HONOURED SIR,

I find I am a very sad creature, and did not know it. I wrote not to my
brother. To you, Sir, I wrote. From you I hope the honour of an answer.
No one reveres her uncle more than I do. Nevertheless, between uncle and
niece, excludes not such a hope: and I think I have not made a proposal
that deserves to be treated with scorn.

Forgive me, Sir--my heart is full. Perhaps one day you may think you
have been prevailed upon (for that is plainly the case!) to join to
treat me--as I do not deserve to be treated. If you are ashamed, as my
brother hints, of having expressed any returning tenderness to me, God
help me! I see I have no mercy to expect from any body! But, Sir, from
your pen let me have an answer; I humbly implore it of you. Till my
brother can recollect what belongs to a sister, I will not take from him
no answer to the letter I wrote to you, nor any commands whatever.

I move every body!--This, Sir, is what you are pleased to mention. But
whom have I moved?--One person in the family has more moving ways than I
have, or he could never so undeservedly have made every body ashamed to
show tenderness to a poor distressed child of the same family.

Return me not this with contempt, or torn, or unanswered, I beseech you.
My father has a title to do that or any thing by his child: but from no
other person in the world of your sex, Sir, ought a young creature of
mine (while she preserves a supplicating spirit) to be so treated.

When what I have before written in the humblest strain has met with such
strange constructions, I am afraid that this unguarded scrawl will be
very ill received. But I beg, Sir, you will oblige me with one line, be
it ever so harsh, in answer to my proposal. I still think it ought to
be attended to. I will enter into the most solemn engagements to make it
valid by a perpetual single life. In a word, any thing I can do, I will
do, to be restored to all your favours. More I cannot say, but that I
am, very undeservedly,

A most unhappy creature.


Betty scrupled again to carry this letter; and said, she should have
anger; and I should have it returned in scraps and bits.

I must take that chance, said I: I only desire that you will deliver it
as directed.

Sad doings! very sad! she said, that young ladies should so violently
set themselves against their duty.

I told her, she should have the liberty to say what she pleased, so she
would but be my messenger that one time: and down she went with it.

I bid her, if she could, slide it into my uncle's hand, unseen; at least
unseen by my brother or sister, for fear it should meet, through their
good office, with the fate she had bespoken for it.

She would not undertake for that, she said.

I am now in expectation of the result. But having so little ground to
hope for their favour or mercy, I opened Mr. Lovelace's letter.

I would send it to you, my dear (as well as those I shall enclose) by
this conveyance; but not being able at present to determine in what
manner I shall answer it, I will give myself the trouble of abstracting
it here, while I am waiting for what may offer from the letter just
carried down.

'He laments, as usual, my ill opinion of him, and readiness to believe
every thing to his disadvantage. He puts into plain English, as I
supposed he would, my hint, that I might be happier, if, by any rashness
he might be guilty of to Solmes, he should come to an untimely end
himself.'

He is concerned, he says, 'That the violence he had expressed on his
extreme apprehensiveness of losing me, should have made him guilty of
any thing I had so much reason to resent.'

He owns, 'That he is passionate: all good-natured men, he says, are so;
and a sincere man cannot hide it.' But appeals to me, 'Whether, if any
occasion in the world could excuse the rashness of his expressions, it
would not be his present dreadful situation, through my indifference,
and the malice of his enemies.'

He says, 'He has more reason than ever, from the contents of my last,
to apprehend, that I shall be prevailed upon by force, if not by fair
means, to fall in with my brother's measures; and sees but too plainly,
that I am preparing him to expect it.

'Upon this presumption, he supplicates, with the utmost earnestness,
that I will not give way to the malice of his enemies.

'Solemn vows of reformation, and everlasting truth and obligingness,
he makes; all in the style of desponding humility: yet calls it a cruel
turn upon him, to impute his protestations to a consciousness of the
necessity there is for making them from his bad character.

'He despises himself, he solemnly protests, for his past follies. He
thanks God he has seen his error; and nothing but my more particular
instructions is wanting to perfect his reformation.

'He promises, that he will do every thing that I shall think he can do
with honour, to bring about a reconciliation with my father; and even
will, if I insist upon it, make the first overtures to my brother, and
treat him as his own brother, because he is mine, if he will not by new
affronts revive the remembrance of the past.

'He begs, in the most earnest and humble manner, for one half-hour's
interview; undertaking by a key, which he owns he has to the
garden-door, leading into the coppice, as we call it, (if I will but
unbolt the door,) to come into the garden at night, and wait till I have
an opportunity to come to him, that he may re-assure me of the truth of
all he writes, and of the affection, and, if needful, protection, of all
his family.

'He presumes not, he says, to write by way of menace to me; but if I
refuse him this favour, he knows not (so desperate have some strokes in
my letter made him) what his despair may make him do.'

He asks me, 'Determined, as my friends are, and far as they have already
gone, and declare they will go, what can I propose to do, to avoid
having Mr. Solmes, if I am carried to my uncle Antony's; unless I
resolve to accept of the protection he has offered to procure me; or
except I will escape to London, or elsewhere, while I can escape?'

He advises me, 'To sue to your mother, for her private reception of
me; only till I can obtain possession of my own estate, and procure my
friends to be reconciled to me; which he is sure they will be desirous
to be, the moment I am out of their power.'

He apprizes me, [It is still my wonder, how he comes by this
intelligence!] 'That my friends have written to my cousin Morden to
represent matters to him in their own partial way; nor doubt they to
influence him on their side of the question.

'That all this shews I have but one way; if none of my friends or
intimates will receive me.

'If I will transport him with the honour of my choice of this one way,
settlements shall be drawn, with proper blanks, which I shall fill up as
I pleased. Let him but have my commands from my own mouth, all my doubts
and scruples from my own lips; and only a repetition, that I will not,
on any consideration, be Solmes's wife; and he shall be easy. But, after
such a letter as I have written, nothing but an interview can make him
so.' He beseeches me therefore, 'To unbolt the door, as that very night;
or, if I receive not this time enough, this night;--and he will, in a
disguise that shall not give suspicion who he is, if he should be seen,
come to the garden door, in hopes to open it with his key; nor will he
have any other lodging than in the coppice both nights; watching every
wakeful hour for the propitious unbolting, unless he has a letter with
my orders to the contrary, or to make some other appointment.'

This letter was dated yesterday: so he was there last night, I suppose;
and will be there this night; and I have not written a line to him: and
now it is too late, were I determined what to write.

I hope he will not go to Mr. Solmes.--I hope he will not come
hither.--If he do either, I will break with him for ever.

What have I to do with these headstrong spirits? I wish I had never--but
what signifies wishing?--I am strangely perplexed: but I need not have
told you this, after such a representation of my situation.




LETTER XVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY MORNING, 7 O'CLOCK

My uncle has vouchsafed to answer me. These that follow are the
contents of his letter; but just now brought me, although written last
night--late I suppose.


MONDAY NIGHT.

MISS CLARY,

Since you are grown such a bold challenger, and teach us all our duty,
though you will not practise your own, I must answer you. Nobody
wants you estate from you. Are you, who refuse ever body's advice,
to prescribe a husband to your sister? Your letter to Mr. Solmes is
inexcusable. I blamed you for it before. Your parents will be obeyed. It
is fit they should. Your mother has nevertheless prevailed to have your
going to your uncle Antony's put off till Thursday: yet owns you deserve
not that, or any other favour from her. I will receive no more of
your letters. You are too artful for me. You are an ungrateful and
unreasonable child: Must you have your way paramount to every body's?
How are you altered.

Your displeased uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.


*****


To be carried away on Thursday--To the moated house--To the chapel--To
Solmes! How can I think of this!--They will make me desperate.


TUESDAY MORNING, 8 O'CLOCK.

I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. I opened it with the
expectation of its being filled with bold and free complaints, on my
not writing to prevent his two nights watching, in weather not extremely
agreeable. But, instead of complaints, he is 'full of tender concern
lest I may have been prevented by indisposition, or by the closer
confinement which he has frequently cautioned me that I may expect.'

He says, 'He had been in different disguises loitering about our garden
and park wall, all the day on Sunday last; and all Sunday night was
wandering about the coppice, and near the back door. It rained; and he
has got a great cold, attended with feverishness, and so hoarse, that he
has almost lost his voice.'

Why did he not flame out in his letter?--Treated as I am treated by my
friends, it is dangerous to be laid under the sense of an obligation to
an addresser's patience; especially when such a one suffers in health
for my sake.

'He had no shelter, he says, but under the great overgrown ivy, which
spreads wildly round the heads of two or three oaklings; and that was
soon wet through.'

You remember the spot. You and I, my dear, once thought ourselves
obliged to the natural shade which those ivy-covered oaklings afforded
us, in a sultry day.

I can't help saying, I am sorry he has suffered for my sake; but 'tis
his own seeking.

His letter is dated last night at eight: 'And, indisposed as he is,
he tells me that he will watch till ten, in hopes of my giving him the
meeting he so earnestly request. And after that, he has a mile to walk
to his horse and servant; and four miles then to ride to his inn.'

He owns, 'That he has an intelligencer in our family; who has failed
him for a day or two past: and not knowing how I do, or how I may be
treated, his anxiety is increased.'

This circumstance gives me to guess who this intelligencer is: Joseph
Leman: the very creature employed and confided in, more than any other,
by my brother.

This is not an honourable way of proceeding in Mr. Lovelace. Did
he learn this infamous practice of corrupting the servants of other
families at the French court, where he resided a good while?

I have been often jealous of this Leman in my little airings and
poultry-visits. Doubly obsequious as he was always to me, I have
thought him my brother's spy upon me; and although he obliged me by
his hastening out of the garden and poultry-yard, whenever I came into
either, have wondered, that from his reports my liberties of those kinds
have not been abridged.* So, possibly, this man may be bribed by both,
yet betray both. Worthy views want not such obliquities as these on
either side. An honest mind must rise into indignation both at the
traitor-maker and the traitor.


     * Mr. Lovelace accounts for this, Vol. I, Letter XXXV.


'He presses with the utmost earnestness for an interview. He would not
presume, he says, to disobey my last personal commands, that he should
not endeavour to attend me again in the wood-house. But says, he can
give me such reasons for my permitting him to wait upon my father
or uncles, as he hopes will be approved by me: for he cannot help
observing, that it is no more suitable to my own spirit than to his,
that he, a man of fortune and family, should be obliged to pursue such a
clandestine address, as would only become a vile fortune-hunter. But, if
I will give my consent for his visiting me like a man, and a gentleman,
no ill treatment shall provoke him to forfeit his temper.

'Lord M. will accompany him, if I please: or Lady Betty Lawrance will
first make the visit to my mother, or to my aunt Hervey, or even to my
uncles, if I choose it. And such terms shall be offered, as shall have
weight upon them.

'He begs, that I will not deny him making a visit to Mr. Solmes. By
all that's good, he vows, that it shall not be with the least intention
either to hurt or affront him; but only to set before him, calmly and
rationally, the consequences that may possibly flow from so fruitless a
perseverance, as well as the ungenerous folly of it, to a mind as noble
as mine. He repeats his own resolution to attend my pleasure, and Mr.
Morden's arrival and advice, for the reward of his own patience.

'It is impossible, he says, but one of these methods must do.
Presence, he observes, even of a disliked person, takes off the edge of
resentments which absence whets, and makes keen.

'He therefore most earnestly repeats his importunities for the
supplicated interview.' He says, 'He has business of consequence in
London: but cannot stir from the inconvenient spot where he has for
some time resided, in disguises unworthy of himself, until he can be
absolutely certain, that I shall not be prevailed upon, either by force
or otherwise; and until he finds me delivered from the insults of my
brother. Nor ought this to be an indifferent point to one, for whose
sake all the world reports me to be used unworthily. But one remark, he
says, he cannot help making: that did my friends know the little favour
I shew him, and the very great distance I keep him at, they would
have no reason to confine me on his account. And another, that they
themselves seem to think him entitled to a different usage, and expect
that he receives it; when, in truth, what he meets with from me is
exactly what they wish him to meet with, excepting in the favour of
my correspondence I honour him with; upon which, he says, he puts the
highest value, and for the sake of which he has submitted to a thousand
indignities.

'He renews his professions of reformation. He is convinced, he says,
that he has already run a long and dangerous course; and that it is high
time to think of returning. It must be from proper conviction, he says,
that a person who has lived too gay a life, resolves to reclaim, before
age or sufferings come upon him.

'All generous spirits, he observes, hate compulsion. Upon this
observation he dwells; but regrets, that he is likely to owe all his
hopes to this compulsion; this injudicious compulsion, he justly calls
it; and none to my esteem for him. Although he presumes upon some
merit--in this implicit regard to my will--in the bearing the daily
indignities offered not only to him, but to his relations, by my
brother--in the nightly watchings, his present indisposition makes him
mention, or he had not debased the nobleness of his passion for me, by
such a selfish instance.'

I cannot but say, I am sorry the man is not well.

I am afraid to ask you, my dear, what you would have done, thus
situated. But what I have done, I have done. In a word, I wrote, 'That
I would, if possible, give him a meeting to-morrow night, between the
hours of nine and twelve, by the ivy summer-house, or in it, or near the
great cascade, at the bottom of the garden; and would unbolt the door,
that he might come in by his own key. But that, if I found the meeting
impracticable, or should change my mind, I would signify as much by
another line; which he must wait for until it were dark.'


TUESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

I am just returned from depositing my billet. How diligent is this man!
It is plain he was in waiting: for I had walked but a few paces, after I
had deposited it, when, my heart misgiving me, I returned, to have taken
it back, in order to reconsider it as I walked, and whether I should or
should not let it go. But I found it gone.

In all probability, there was but a brick wall, of a few inches thick,
between Mr. Lovelace and me, at the very time I put the letter under the
brick!

I am come back dissatisfied with myself. But I think, my dear, there
can be no harm in meeting him. If I do not, he may take some violent
measures. What he knows of the treatment I meet with in malice to him,
and with the view to frustrate all his hopes, may make him desperate.
His behaviour last time I saw him, under the disadvantages of time and
place, and surprised as I was, gives me no apprehension of any thing but
discovery. What he requires is not unreasonable, and cannot affect my
future choice and determination: it is only to assure him from my own
lips, that I never will be the wife of a man I hate. If I have not an
opportunity to meet without hazard or detection, he must once more
bear the disappointment. All his trouble, and mine too, is owing to his
faulty character. This, although I hate tyranny and arrogance in all
shapes, makes me think less of the risques he runs, and the fatigues he
undergoes, than otherwise I should do; and still less, as my sufferings
(derived from the same source) are greater than his.

Betty confirms this intimation, that I must go to my uncle's on
Thursday. She was sent on purpose to direct me to prepare myself for
going, and to help me to get every thing up in order for my removal.




LETTER XIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY, THREE O'CLOCK, MARCH 28.


I have mentioned several times the pertness of Mrs. Betty to me;
and now, having a little time upon my hands, I will give you a short
dialogue that passed just now between us. It may, perhaps, be a little
relief to you from the dull subjects with which I am perpetually teasing
you.

As she attended me at dinner, she took notice, That Nature is satisfied
with a very little nourishment: and thus she complimentally proved
it--For, Miss, said she, you eat nothing; yet never looked more
charmingly in your life.

As to the former part of your speech, Betty, said I, you observe well;
and I have often thought, when I have seen how healthy the children of
the labouring poor look, and are, with empty stomachs, and hardly a good
meal in a week, that God Almighty is very kind to his creatures, in this
respect, as well as in all others in making much not necessary to the
support of life; when three parts in four of His creatures, if it were,
would not know how to obtain it. It puts me in mind of two proverbial
sentences which are full of admirable meaning.

What, pray, Miss, are they? I love to hear you talk, when you are so
sedate as you seem now to be.

The one is to the purpose we are speaking of: Poverty is the mother of
health. And let me tell you, Betty, if I had a better appetite, and
were to encourage it, with so little rest, and so much distress and
persecution, I don't think I should be able to preserve my reason.

There's no inconvenience but has its convenience, said Betty, giving me
proverb for proverb. But what is the other, Madam?

That the pleasures of the mighty are not obtained by the tears of the
poor. It is but reasonable, therefore, methinks, that the plenty of
the one should be followed by distempers; and that the indigence of the
other should be attended with that health, which makes all its other
discomforts light on the comparison. And hence a third proverb, Betty,
since you are an admirer of proverbs: Better a hare-foot than none at
all; that is to say, than not to be able to walk.

She was mightily taken with what I said: See, returned she, what a fine
thing scholarship is!--I, said she, had always, from a girl, a taste for
reading, though it were but in Mother Goose, and concerning the fairies
[and then she took genteelly a pinch of snuff]: could but my parents
have let go as fast as I pulled, I should have been a very happy
creature.

Very likely, you would have made great improvements, Betty: but as it
is, I cannot say, but since I had the favour of your attendance in this
intimate manner, I have heard smarter things from you, than I have heard
at table from some of my brother's fellow-collegians.

Your servant, dear Miss; dropping me one of her best courtesies: so
fine a judge as you are!--It is enough to make one very proud. Then with
another pinch--I cannot indeed but say, bridling upon it, that I have
heard famous scholars often and often say very silly things: things
I should be ashamed myself to say; but I thought they did it out of
humility, and in condescension to those who had not their learning.

That she might not be too proud, I told her, I would observe, that the
liveliness or quickness she so happily discovered in herself, was not
so much an honour to her, as what she owed to her sex; which, as I had
observed in many instances, had great advantages over the other, in all
the powers that related to imagination. And hence, Mrs. Betty, you'll
take notice, as I have of late had opportunity to do, that your own
talent at repartee and smartness, when it has something to work upon,
displays itself to more advantage, than could well be expected from one
whose friends, to speak in your own phrase, could not let go so fast as
you pulled.

The wench gave me a proof of the truth of my observation, in a manner
still more alert than I had expected: If, said she, our sex had so much
advantage in smartness, it is the less to be wondered at, that you,
Miss, who have had such an education, should outdo all the men and women
too, that come near you.

Bless me, Betty, said I, what a proof do you give me of your wit and
your courage at the same time! This is outdoing yourself. It would make
young ladies less proud, and more apprehensive, were they generally
attended by such smart servants, and their mouths permitted to be
unlocked upon them as yours has been lately upon me.--But, take away,
Mrs. Betty.

Why, Miss, you have eat nothing at all--I hope you are not displeased
with your dinner for any thing I have said.

No, Mrs. Betty, I am pretty well used to your freedoms now, you know.--I
am not displeased in the main, to observe, that, were the succession of
modern fine ladies to be extinct, it might be supplied from those whom
they place in the next rank to themselves, their chamber-maids and
confidants. Your young mistress has contributed a great deal to this
quickness of yours. She always preferred your company to mine. As
you pulled, she let go; and so, Mrs. Betty, you have gained by her
conversation what I have lost.

Why, Miss, if you come to that, nobody says better things than Miss
Harlowe. I could tell you one, if I pleased, upon my observing to her,
that you lived of late upon the air, and had no stomach to any thing;
yet looked as charmingly as ever.

I dare say, it was a very good-natured one, Mrs. Betty! Do you then
please that I shall hear it?

Only this, Miss, That your stomachfulness had swallowed up your stomach;
and, That obstinacy was meat, drink, and clothes to you.

Ay, Mrs. Betty; and did she say this?--I hope she laughed when she said
it, as she does at all her good things, as she calls them. It was very
smart, and very witty. I wish my mind were so much at ease, as to aim at
being witty too. But if you admire such sententious sayings, I'll help
you to another; and that is, Encouragement and approbation make people
show talents they were never suspected to have; and this will do both
for mistress and maid. And another I'll furnish you with, the
contrary of the former, that will do only for me: That persecution and
discouragement depress ingenuous minds, and blunt the edge of lively
imaginations. And hence may my sister's brilliancy and my stupidity be
both accounted for. Ingenuous, you must know, Mrs. Betty, and ingenious,
are two things; and I would not arrogate the latter to myself.

Lord, Miss, said the foolish girl, you know a great deal for your
years.--You are a very learned young lady!--What pity--

None of your pitties, Mrs. Betty, I know what you'd say. But tell me, if
you can, Is it resolved that I shall be carried to my uncle Antony's on
Thursday?

I was willing to reward myself for the patience she had made me
exercise, by getting at what intelligence I could from her.

Why, Miss, seating herself at a little distance (excuse my sitting down)
with the snuff-box tapped very smartly, the lid opened, and a
pinch taken with a dainty finger and thumb, the other three fingers
distendedly bent, and with a fine flourish--I cannot but say, that it is
my opinion, you will certainly go on Thursday; and this noless foless,
as I have heard my young lady say in FRENCH.

Whether I am willing or not willing, you mean, I suppose, Mrs. Betty?

You have it, Miss.

Well but, Betty, I have no mind to be turned out of doors so suddenly.
Do you think I could not be permitted to tarry one week longer?

How can I tell, Miss?

O Mrs. Betty, you can tell a great deal, if you please. But here I am
forbid writing to any one of my family; none of it now will come near
me; nor will any of it permit me to see them: How shall I do to make
known my request, to stay here a week or fortnight longer?

Why, Miss, I fancy, if you were to shew a compliable temper, your
friends would shew a compliable one too. But would you expect favours,
and grant none?

Smartly put, Betty! But who knows what may be the result of my being
carried to my uncle Antony's?

Who knows, Miss!--Why any body will guess what may be the result.

As how, Betty?

As how! repeated the pert wench, Why, Miss, you will stand in your own
light, as you have hitherto done: and your parents, as such good parents
ought, will be obeyed.

If, Mrs. Betty, I had not been used to your oughts, and to have my duty
laid down to me by your oraculous wisdom I should be apt to stare at the
liberty of you speech.

You seem angry, Miss. I hope I take no unbecoming liberty.

If thou really thinkest thou dost not, thy ignorance is more to be
pitied, than thy pertness resented. I wish thou wouldst leave me to
myself.

When young ladies fall out with their own duty, it is not much to be
wondered at, that they are angry at any body who do theirs.

That's a very pretty saying, Mrs. Betty!--I see plainly what thy duty is
in thy notion, and am obliged to those who taught it thee.

Every body takes notice, Miss, that you can say very cutting words in a
cool manner, and yet not call names, as I have known some gentlefolks
as well as others do when in a passion. But I wish you had permitted
'Squire Solmes to see you: he would have told you such stories of
'Squire Lovelace, as you would have turned your heart against him for
ever.

And know you any of the particulars of those sad stories?

Indeed I don't; but you'll hear all at your uncle Antony's, I suppose;
and a great deal more perhaps than you will like to hear.

Let me hear what I will, I am determined against Mr. Solmes, were it to
cost me my life.

If you are, Miss, the Lord have mercy on you! For what with this letter
of yours to 'Squire Solmes, whom they so much value, and what with
their antipathy to 'Squire Lovelace, whom they hate, they will have no
patience with you.

What will they do, Betty? They won't kill me? What will they do?

Kill you! No!--But you will not be suffered to stir from thence, till
you have complied with your duty. And no pen and ink will be allowed you
as here; where they are of opinion you make no good use of it: nor would
it be allowed here, only as they intend so soon to send you away to your
uncle's. No-body will be permitted to see you, or to correspond with
you. What farther will be done, I can't say; and, if I could, it may not
be proper. But you may prevent all, by one word: and I wish you would,
Miss. All then would be easy and happy. And, if I may speak my mind, I
see not why one man is not as good as another: why, especially, a sober
man is not as good as a rake.

Well, Betty, said I, sighing, all thy impertinence goes for nothing. But
I see I am destined to be a very unhappy creature. Yet I will venture
upon one request more to them.

And so, quite sick of the pert creature and of myself, I retired to my
closet, and wrote a few lines to my uncle Harlowe, notwithstanding his
prohibition; in order to get a reprieve from being carried away so soon
as Thursday next, if I must go. And this, that I might, if complied
with, suspend the appointment I have made with Mr. Lovelace; for my
heart misgives me as to meeting him; and that more and more; I know not
why. Under the superscription of the letter, I wrote these words: 'Pray,
dear Sir, be pleased to give this a reading.'

This is a copy of what I wrote:


TUESDAY AFTERNOON.

HONOURED SIR,

Let me this once be heard with patience, and have my petition granted.
It is only, that I may not be hurried away so soon as next Thursday.

Why should the poor girl be turned out of doors so suddenly, so
disgracefully? Procure for me, Sir, one fortnight's respite. In that
space of time, I hope you will all relent. My mamma shall not need to
shut her door in apprehension of seeing her disgraceful child. I will
not presume to think of entering her presence, or my papa's without
leave. One fortnight's respite is but a small favour for them to grant,
except I am to be refused every thing I ask; but it is of the highest
import to my peace of mind. Procure it for me, therefore, dearest Sir;
and you will exceedingly oblige

Your dutiful, though greatly afflicted niece, CL. HARLOWE.


I sent this down: my uncle was not gone: and he now stays to know the
result of the question put to me in the enclosed answer which he has
given to mind.


Your going to your uncle's was absolutely concluded upon for next
Thursday. Nevertheless, your mother, seconded by Mr. Solmes, pleaded
so strongly to have you indulged, that your request for a delay will
be complied with, upon one condition; and whether for a fortnight, or
a shorter time, that will depend upon yourself. If you refuse the
condition, your mother declares she will give over all further
intercession for you.--Nor do you deserve this favour, as you put it
upon our yielding to you, not you to us.

This condition is, that you admit of a visit from Mr. Solmes, for one
hour, in company of your brother, your sister, or your uncle Antony,
choose who you will.

If you comply not, go next Thursday to a house which is become strangely
odious to you of late, whether you get ready to go or not. Answer
therefore directly to the point. No evasion. Name your day and hour. Mr.
Solmes will neither eat you, nor drink you. Let us see, whether we are
to be complied with in any thing, or not.

JOHN HARLOWE.


*****


After a very little deliberation, I resolved to comply with this
condition. All I fear is, that Mr. Lovelace's intelligencer may inform
him of it; and that his apprehensions upon it may make him take some
desperate resolution: especially as now (having more time given me here)
I think to write to him to suspend the interview he is possibly so sure
of. I sent down the following to my uncle:


HONOURED SIR,

Although I see not what end the proposed condition can answer, I comply
with it. I wish I could with every thing expected of me. If I must name
one, in whose company I am to see the gentleman, and that one not my
mamma, whose presence I could wish to be honoured by on the occasion,
let my uncle, if he pleases, be the person. If I must name the day, (a
long day, I doubt, will not be permitted me,) let it be next Tuesday.

The hour, four in the afternoon. The place either the ivy summer-house,
or in the little parlour I used to be permitted to call mine.

Be pleased, Sir, nevertheless, to prevail upon my mamma, to vouchsafe me
her presence on the occasion.

I am, Sir, your ever-dutiful CL. HARLOWE.


A reply is just sent me. I thought it became my averseness to this
meeting, to name a distant day: but I did not expect they would have
complied with it. So here is one week gained!

This is the reply:


You have done well to comply. We are willing to think the best of every
slight instance of duty from you. Yet have you seemed to consider the
day as an evil day, and so put if far off. This nevertheless is granted
you, as no time need to be lost, if you are as generous after the day,
as we are condescending before it. Let me advise you, not to harden your
mind; nor take up your resolution beforehand. Mr. Solmes has more awe,
and even terror, at the thought of seeing you, than you can have at the
thoughts of seeing him. His motive is love; let not yours be hatred. My
brother Antony will be present, in hopes you will deserve well of him,
by behaving well to the friend of the family. See you use him as such.
Your mother had permission to be there, if she thought fit: but says,
she would not for a thousand pound, unless you would encourage her
beforehand as she wishes to be encouraged. One hint I am to give you
mean time. It is this: To make a discreet use of your pen and ink.
Methinks a young creature of niceness should be less ready to write to
one man, when she is designed to be another's.

This compliance, I hope, will produce greater, and then the peace of the
family will be restored: which is what is heartily wished by

Your loving uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.

Unless it be to the purpose our hearts are set upon, you need not write
again.


*****


This man have more terror at seeing me, than I can have at seeing
him!--How can that be? If he had half as much, he would not wish to see
me!--His motive love!--Yes, indeed! Love of himself! He knows no other;
for love, that deserves the name, seeks the satisfaction of the beloved
object more than its own. Weighed in this scale, what a profanation is
this man guilty of!

Not to take up my resolution beforehand!--That advice comes too late.

But I must make a discreet use of my pen. That, I doubt, as they have
managed it, in the sense they mean it, is as much out of my power, as
the other.

But write to one man, when I am designed for another!--What a shocking
expression is that!

Repenting of my appointment with Mr. Lovelace before I had this favour
granted me, you may believe I hesitated not a moment to revoke it now
that I had gained such a respite. Accordingly, I wrote, 'That I found
it inconvenient to meet him, as I had intended: that the risque I should
run of a discovery, and the mischiefs that might flow from it, could not
be justified by any end that such a meeting could answer: that I found
one certain servant more in my way, when I took my morning and evening
airings, than any other: that the person who might reveal the secrets
of a family to him, might, if opportunity were given him, betray me, or
him, to those whom it was his duty to serve: that I had not been used to
a conduct so faulty, as to lay myself at the mercy of servants: and was
sorry he had measures to pursue, that made steps necessary in his own
opinion, which, in mine, were very culpable, and which no end could
justify: that things drawing towards a crisis between my friends and me,
an interview could avail nothing; especially as the method by which this
correspondence was carried on was not suspected, and he could write all
that was in his mind to write: that I expected to be at liberty to judge
of what was proper and fit upon this occasion: especially as he might be
assured, that I would sooner choose death, than Mr. Solmes.'


TUESDAY NIGHT.

I have deposited my letter to Mr. Lovelace. Threatening as things look
against me, I am much better pleased with myself for declining the
interview than I was before. I suppose he will be a little out of humour
upon it, however: but as I reserved to myself the liberty of changing my
mind; and as it is easy for him to imagine there may be reasons for it
within-doors, which he cannot judge of without; besides those I have
suggested, which of themselves are of sufficient weight to engage his
acquiescence; I should think it strange, if he acquiesces not on this
occasion, and that with a cheerfulness, which may shew me, that his last
letter is written from his heart: For, if he be really so much concerned
at his past faults, as he pretends, and has for some time pretended,
must he not, of course, have corrected, in some degree, the impetuosity
of his temper? The first step to reformation, as I conceive, is to
subdue sudden gusts of passion, from which frequently the greatest evils
arise, and to learn to bear disappointments. If the irascible passions
cannot be overcome, what opinion can we have of the person's power over
those to which bad habit, joined to greater temptation, gives stronger
force?

Pray, my dear, be so kind as to make inquiry, by some safe hand, after
the disguises Mr. Lovelace assumes at the inn he puts up at in the poor
village of Neale, he calls it. If it be the same I take it to be, I
never knew it was considerable enough to have a name; nor that it has an
inn in it.

As he must, to be so constantly near us, be much there, I would be glad
to have some account of his behaviour; and what the people think of him.
In such a length of time, he must by his conduct either give scandal,
or hope of reformation. Pray, my dear, humour me in this inquiry. I have
reason for it, which you shall be acquainted with another time, if the
result of the inquiry discover them not.




LETTER XX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY MORNING, NINE O'CLOCK.


I am just returned from my morning walk, and already have received a
letter from Mr. Lovelace in answer to mine deposited last night. He
must have had pen, ink, and paper with him; for it was written in the
coppice; with this circumstance: On one knee, kneeling with the other.
Not from reverence to the written to, however, as you'll find!

Well we are instructed early to keep these men at distance. An
undesigning open heart, where it is loth to disoblige, is easily drawn
in, I see, to oblige more than ever it designed. It is too apt to govern
itself by what a bold spirit is encouraged to expect of it. It is very
difficult for a good-natured young person to give a negative where it
disesteems not.

Our hearts may harden and contract, as we gain experience, and when we
have smarted perhaps for our easy folly: and so they ought, or we should
be upon very unequal terms with the world.

Excuse these grave reflections. This man has vexed me heartily. I see
his gentleness was art: fierceness, and a temper like what I have been
too much used to at home, are Nature in him. Nothing, I think, shall
ever make me forgive him; for, surely, there can be no good reason for
his impatience on an expectation given with reserve, and revocable.--I
so much to suffer through him; yet, to be treated as if I were obliged
to bear insults from him--!

But here you will be pleased to read his letter; which I shall enclose.


TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE

GOOD GOD!

What is now to become of me!--How shall I support this
disappointment!--No new cause!--On one knee, kneeling with the other, I
write!--My feet benumbed with midnight wanderings through the heaviest
dews that ever fell: my wig and my linen dripping with the hoar frost
dissolving on them!--Day but just breaking--Sun not risen to exhale--May
it never rise again!--Unless it bring healing and comfort to a benighted
soul! In proportion to the joy you had inspired (ever lovely promiser!)
in such proportion is my anguish!

O my beloved creature!--But are not your very excuses confessions of
excuses inexcusable? I know not what I write!--That servant in your
way!* By the great God of Heaven, that servant was not, dared not, could
not, be in your way!--Curse upon the cool caution that is pleased to
deprive me of an expectation so transporting!


     * See Letter XIX.


And are things drawing towards a crisis between your friends and
you?--Is not this a reason for me to expect, the rather to expect, the
promised interview?

CAN I write all that is in my mind, say you?--Impossible!--Not the
hundredth part of what is in my mind, and in my apprehension, can I
write!

Oh! the wavering, the changeable sex!--But can Miss Clarissa Harlowe--

Forgive me, Madam!--I know not what I write!

Yet, I must, I do, insist upon your promise--or that you will condescend
to find better excuses for the failure--or convince me, that stronger
reasons are imposed upon you, than those you offer.--A promise once
given (upon deliberation given,) the promised only can dispense with;
except in cases of a very apparent necessity imposed upon the promiser,
which leaves no power to perform it.

The first promise you ever made me! Life and death perhaps depending
upon it--my heart desponding from the barbarous methods resolved to be
taken with you in malice to me!

You would sooner choose death than Solmes. (How my soul spurns the
competition!) O my beloved creature, what are these but words?--Whose
words?--Sweet and ever adorable--What?--Promise breaker--must I call
you?--How shall I believe the asseveration, (your supposed duty in the
question! Persecution so flaming!--Hatred to me so strongly avowed!)
after this instance of you so lightly dispensing with your promise?

If, my dearest life! you would prevent my distraction, or, at least,
distracted consequences, renew the promised hope!--My fate is indeed
upon its crisis.

Forgive me, dearest creature, forgive me!--I know I have written in too
much anguish of mind!--Writing this, in the same moment that the just
dawning light has imparted to me the heavy disappointment.

I dare not re-peruse what I have written. I must deposit it. It may
serve to shew you my distracted apprehension that this disappointment is
but a prelude to the greatest of all.--Nor, having here any other paper,
am I able to write again, if I would, on this gloomy spot. (Gloomy is
my soul; and all Nature around me partakes of my gloom!)--I trust it
therefore to your goodness--if its fervour excite your displeasure
rather than your pity, you wrong my passion; and I shall be ready to
apprehend, that I am intended to be the sacrifice of more miscreants
than one! [Have patience with me, dearest creature!--I mean Solmes and
your brother only.] But if, exerting your usual generosity, you will
excuse and re appoint, may that God, whom you profess to serve, and who
is the God of truth and of promises, protect and bless you, for both;
and for restoring to himself, and to hope,

Your ever-adoring, yet almost desponding, LOVELACE!

Ivy Cavern, in the Coppice--Day but just breaking.


*****


This is the answer I shall return:


WEDNESDAY MORNING.

I am amazed, Sir, at the freedom of your reproaches. Pressed and teased,
against convenience and inclination, to give you a private meeting, am I
to be thus challenged and upbraided, and my sex reflected upon, because
I thought it prudent to change my mind?--A liberty I had reserved
to myself, when I made the appointment, as you call it. I wanted not
instances of your impatient spirit to other people: yet may it be happy
for me, that I can have this new one; which shows, that you can as
little spare me, when I pursue the dictates of my own reason, as you do
others, for acting up to theirs. Two motives you must be governed by in
this excess. The one my easiness; the other your own presumption. Since
you think you have found out the first, and have shown so much of the
last upon it, I am too much alarmed, not to wish and desire, that your
letter of this day may conclude all the trouble you had from, or for,

Your humble servant, CL. HARLOWE.


*****


I believe, my dear, I may promise myself your approbation, whenever I
write or speak with spirit, be it to whom it will. Indeed, I find but
too much reason to exert it, since I have to deal with people, who
govern themselves in their conduct to me, not by what is fit or decent,
right or wrong, but by what they think my temper will bear. I have, till
very lately, been praised for mine; but it has always been by those who
never gave me opportunity to return the compliment to them. Some people
have acted, as if they thought forbearance on one side absolutely
necessary for them and me to be upon good terms together; and in this
case have ever taken care rather to owe that obligation than to lay it.
You have hinted to me, that resentment is not natural to my temper, and
that therefore it must soon subside: it may be so with respect to my
relations; but not to Mr. Lovelace, I assure you.


WEDNESDAY NOON, MARCH 29.

We cannot always answer for what we can do: but to convince you, that I
can keep my above resolution, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, angry as my
letter is, and three hours since it was written, I assure you, that I
repent it not; nor will soften it, although I find it is not taken away.
And yet I hardly ever before did any thing in anger, that I did not
repent in half an hour; and question myself in less that that time,
whether I was right or wrong.

In this respite till Tuesday, I have a little time to look about me,
as I may say, and to consider of what I have to do, and can do. And Mr.
Lovelace's insolence will make me go very home with myself. Not that I
think I can conquer my aversion to Mr. Solmes. I am sure I cannot. But,
if I absolutely break with Mr. Lovelace, and give my friends convincing
proofs of it, who knows but they will restore me to their favour, and
let their views in relation to the other man go off by degrees?--Or,
at least, that I may be safe till my cousin Morden arrives: to whom,
I think, I will write; and the rather, as Mr. Lovelace has assured
me, that my friends have written to him to make good their side of the
question.

But, with all my courage, I am exceedingly apprehensive about the
Tuesday next, and about what may result from my steadfastness; for
steadfast I am sure I shall be. They are resolved, I am told, to try
every means to induce me to comply with what they are determined upon.
And I am resolved to do all I can to avoid what they would force me to
do. A dreadful contention between parents and child!--Each hoping to
leave the other without excuse, whatever the consequence may be.

What can I do? Advise me, my dear. Something is strangely wrong
somewhere! to make parents, the most indulgent till now, seem cruel in
a child's eye; and a daughter, till within these few weeks, thought
unexceptionably dutiful, appear, in their judgment, a rebel!--Oh! my
ambitious and violent brother! What may he have to answer for to both!

Be pleased to remember, my dear, that your last favour was dated on
Saturday. This is Wednesday: and none of mine have been taken away
since. Don't let me want you advice. My situation is extremely
difficult.--But I am sure you love me still: and not the less on that
account. Adieu, my beloved friend.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXI

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING, DAY-BREAK, MARCH
30.

An accident, and not remissness, has occasioned my silence.

My mother was sent for on Sunday night by her cousin Larkin, whom I
mentioned in one of my former, and who was extremely earnest to see her.

This poor woman was always afraid of death, and was one of those weak
persons who imagine that the making of their will must be an undoubted
forerunner of it.

She had always said, when urged to the necessary work, That whenever she
made it, she should not live long after; and, one would think, imagined
she was under an obligation to prove her words: for, though she had been
long bed-rid, and was, in a manner, worn out before, yet she thought
herself better, till she was persuaded to make it: and from that moment,
remembering what she used to prognosticate, (her fears, helping on what
she feared, as is often the case, particularly in the small-pox,) grew
worse; and had it in her head once to burn her will, in hopes to grow
better upon it.

She sent my mother word, that the doctors had given her over: but that
she could not die till she saw her. I told my mother, That if she wished
her a chance for recovery, she should not, for that reason, go. But go
she would; and, what was worse, would make me go with her; and that, at
an hour's warning; for she said nothing of it to me, till she was rising
in the morning early, resolving to return again at night. Had there been
more time for argumentation, to be sure I had not gone; but as it was,
there was a kind of necessity that my preparation to obey her, should,
in a manner, accompany her command.--A command so much out of the way,
on such a solemn occasion! And this I represented: but to no purpose:
There never was such a contradicting girl in the world--My wisdom
always made her a fool!--But she would be obliged this time, proper or
improper.

I have but one way of accounting for this sudden whim of my mother; and
that is this--She had a mind to accept of Mr. Hickman's offer to escort
her:--and I verily believe [I wish I were quite sure of it] had a mind
to oblige him with my company--as far as I know, to keep me out of
worse.

For, would you believe it?--as sure as you are alive, she is afraid for
her favourite Hickman, because of the long visit your Lovelace, though
so much by accident, made me in her absence, last time she was at the
same place. I hope, my dear, you are not jealous too. But indeed I
now-and-then, when she teases me with praises which Hickman cannot
deserve, in return fall to praising those qualities and personalities in
Lovelace, which the other never will have. Indeed I do love to tease a
little bit, that I do.--My mamma's girl--I had like to have said.

As you know she is as passionate, as I am pert, you will not wonder to
be told, that we generally fall out on these occasions. She flies from
me, at the long run. It would be undutiful in me to leave her first--and
then I get an opportunity to pursue our correspondence.

For, now I am rambling, let me tell you, that she does not much favour
that;--for two reasons, I believe:--One, that I don't shew her all that
passes between us; the other, that she thinks I harden your mind against
your duty, as it is called. And with her, for a reason at home, as I
have hinted more than once, parents cannot do wrong; children cannot
oppose, and be right. This obliges me now-and-then to steal an hour, as
I may say, and not let her know how I am employed.

You may guess from what I have written, how averse I was to comply with
such an unreasonable stretch of motherly authority. But it came to be a
test of duty; so I was obliged to yield, though with a full persuasion
of being in the right.

I have always your reproofs upon these occasions: in your late letters
stronger than ever. A good reason why, you'll say, because more deserved
than ever. I thank you kindly for your correction. I hope to make
correction of it. But let me tell you, that your stripes, whether
deserved or not, have made me sensible, deeper than the skin--but of
this another time.

It was Monday afternoon before we reached the old lady's house. That
fiddling, parading fellow [you know who I mean] made us wait for him two
hours, and I to go to a journey I disliked! only for the sake of having
a little more tawdry upon his housings; which he had hurried his sadler
to put on, to make him look fine, being to escort his dear Madam Howe,
and her fair daughter. I told him, that I supposed he was afraid, that
the double solemnity in the case (that of the visit to a dying woman,
and that of his own countenance) would give him the appearance of an
undertaker; to avoid which, he ran into as bad an extreme, and I doubted
would be taken for a mountebank.

The man was confounded. He took it as strongly, as if his conscience
gave assent to the justice of the remark: otherwise he would have borne
it better; for he is used enough to this sort of treatment. I thought he
would have cried. I have heretofore observed, that on this side of the
contract, he seems to be a mighty meek sort of creature. And though I
should like it in him hereafter perhaps, yet I can't help despising him
a little in my heart for it now. I believe, my dear, we all love your
blustering fellows best; could we but direct the bluster, and bid it
roar when and at whom we pleased.

The poor man looked at my mother. She was so angry, (my airs upon it,
and my opposition to the journey, have all helped,) that for half the
way she would not speak to me. And when she did, it was, I wish I had
not brought you! You know not what it is to condescend. It is my fault,
not Mr. Hickman's, that you are here so much against your will. Have you
no eyes for this side of the chariot?

And then he fared the better from her, as he always does, for faring
worse from me: for there was, How do you now, Sir? And how do you now,
Mr. Hickman? as he ambled now on this side of the chariot, now on that,
stealing a prim look at me; her head half out of the chariot, kindly
smiling, as if married to the man but a fortnight herself: while I
always saw something to divert myself on the side of the chariot where
the honest man was not, were it but old Robin at a distance, on his roan
Keffel.

Our courtship-days, they say, are our best days. Favour destroys
courtship. Distance increases it. Its essence is distance. And, to see
how familiar these men-wretches grow upon a smile, what an awe they are
struck into when we frown; who would not make them stand off? Who would
not enjoy a power, that is to be short-lived?

Don't chide me one bit for this, my dear. It is in nature. I can't help
it. Nay, for that matter, I love it, and wish not to help it. So spare
your gravity, I beseech you on this subject. I set up not for a perfect
character. The man will bear it. And what need you care? My mother
overbalances all he suffers: And if he thinks himself unhappy, he ought
never to be otherwise.

Then did he not deserve a fit of the sullens, think you, to make us lose
our dinner for his parade, since in so short a journey my mother would
not bait, and lose the opportunity of coming back that night, had the
old lady's condition permitted it? To say nothing of being the cause,
that my mamma was in the glout with her poor daughter all the way.

At our alighting I gave him another dab; but it was but a little one.
Yet the manner, and the air, made up (as I intended they should) for
that defect. My mother's hand was kindly put into his, with a simpering
altogether bridal; and with another How do you now, Sir?--All his plump
muscles were in motion, and a double charge of care and obsequiousness
fidgeted up his whole form, when he offered to me his officious palm.
My mother, when I was a girl, always bid me hold up my head. I just then
remembered her commands, and was dutiful--I never held up my head so
high. With an averted supercilious eye, and a rejecting hand, half
flourishing--I have no need of help, Sir!--You are in my way.

He ran back, as if on wheels; with a face excessively mortified: I had
thoughts else to have followed the too-gentle touch, with a declaration,
that I had as many hands and feet as himself. But this would have been
telling him a piece of news, as to the latter, that I hope he had not
the presumption to guess at.


*****


We found the poor woman, as we thought, at the last gasp. Had we come
sooner, we could not have got away as we intended, that night. You see I
am for excusing the man all I can; and yet, I assure you, I have not so
much as a conditional liking to him. My mother sat up most part of the
night, expecting every hour would have been her poor cousin's last. I
bore her company till two.

I never saw the approaches of death in a grown person before; and was
extremely shocked. Death, to one in health, is a very terrible thing. We
pity the person for what she suffers: and we pity ourselves for what we
must some time hence in like sort suffer; and so are doubly affected.

She held out till Tuesday morning, eleven. As she had told my mother
that she had left her an executrix, and her and me rings and mourning;
we were employed all that day in matters of the will [by which, by the
way, my own cousin Jenny Fynnett is handsomely provided for], so that it
was Wednesday morning early, before we could set out on our return.

It is true, we got home (having no housings to stay for) by noon: but
though I sent Robin away before he dismounted, (who brought me back
a whole packet, down to the same Wednesday noon,) yet was I really so
fatigued, and shocked, as I must own, at the hard death of the old
lady; my mother likewise (who has no reason to dislike this world) being
indisposed from the same occasion; that I could not set about writing
time enough for Robin's return that night.

But having recruited my spirits, my mother having also had a good night,
I arose with the dawn, to write this, and get it dispatched time enough
for your breakfast airing; that your suspense might be as short as
possible.


*****


I will soon follow this with another. I will employ a person directly
to find out how Lovelace behaves himself at his inn. Such a busy spirit
must be traceable.

But, perhaps, my dear, you are indifferent now about him, or his
employments; for this request was made before he mortally offended you.
Nevertheless, I will have inquiry made. The result, it is very probable,
will be of use to confirm you in your present unforgiving temper.--And
yet, if the poor man [shall I pity him for you, my dear?] should be
deprived of the greatest blessing any man on earth can receive, and to
which he has the presumption, with so little merit, to aspire; he will
have run great risks; caught great colds; hazarded fevers; sustained
the highest indignities; braved the inclemencies of skies, and all
for--nothing!--Will not this move your generosity (if nothing else) in
his favour!--Poor Mr. Lovelace--!

I would occasion no throb; nor half-throb; no flash of sensibility, like
lightning darting in, and as soon suppressed by a discretion that no
one of the sex ever before could give such an example of--I would not,
I say; and yet, for such a trial of you to yourself, rather than as an
impertinent overflow of raillery in your friend, as money-takers try a
suspected guinea by the sound, let me on such a supposition, sound you,
by repeating, poor Mr. Lovelace!

And now, my dear, how is it with you? How do you now, as my mother says
to Mr. Hickman, when her pert daughter has made him look sorrowful?




LETTER XXII

MR. HICKMAN, TO MRS. HOWE WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29.


MADAM,

It is with infinite regret that I think myself obliged, by pen and ink,
to repeat my apprehension, that it is impossible for me ever to obtain a
share in the affections of your beloved daughter. O that it were not too
evident to every one, as well as to myself, even to our very servants,
that my love for her, and my assiduities, expose me rather to her scorn
[forgive me, Madam, the hard word!] than to the treatment due to a man
whose proposals have met with your approbation, and who loves her above
all the women in the world!

Well might the merit of my passion be doubted, if, like Mr. Solmes to
the truly-admirably Miss Clarissa Harlowe, I could continue my addresses
to Miss Howe's distaste. Yet what will not the discontinuance cost me!

Give me leave, nevertheless, dearest, worthiest Lady, to repeat, what I
told you, on Monday night, at Mrs. Larkin's, with a heart even bursting
with grief, That I wanted not the treatment of that day to convince
me, that I am not, nor ever can be, the object of Miss Howe's voluntary
favour. What hopes can there be, that a lady will ever esteem, as a
husband, the man, whom, as a lover, she despises? Will not every act
of obligingness from such a one, be construed as an unmanly tameness
of spirit, and entitle him the more to her disdain?--My heart is full:
Forgive me, if I say, that Miss Howe's treatment of me does no credit
either to her education, or fine sense.

Since, then, it is too evident, that she cannot esteem me; and since, as
I have heard it justly observed by the excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe,
that love is not a voluntary passion; would it not be ungenerous to
subject the dear daughter to the displeasure of a mother so justly fond
of her; and you, Madam, while you are so good as to interest yourself in
my favour, to uneasiness? And why, were I even to be sure, at last, of
succeeding by means of your kind partiality to me, should I wish to make
the best-beloved of my soul unhappy; since mutual must be our happiness,
or misery for life the consequence to both?

My best wishes will for ever attend the dear, the ever-dear lady! may
her nuptials be happy! they must be so, if she marry the man she can
honour with her love. Yet I will say, that whoever be the happy, the
thrice-happy man, he can never love her with a passion more ardent and
more sincere than mine.

Accept, dear Madam, of my most grateful thanks for a distinction that
has been the only support of my presumption in an address I am obliged,
as utterly hopeless, to discontinue. A distinction, on which (and not
on my own merits) I had entirely relied; but which, I find, can avail me
nothing. To the last hour of my life, it will give me pleasure to think,
that had your favour, your recommendation, been of sufficient weight to
conquer what seems to be an invincible aversion, I had been the happiest
of men.

I am, dear Madam, with inviolable respect, your ever obliged and
faithful humble servant, CHARLES HICKMAN.




LETTER XXIII

MRS. HOWE, TO CHARLES HICKMAN, ESQ. THURSDAY, MARCH 30.


I cannot but say, Mr. Hickman, but you have cause to be dissatisfied--to
be out of humour--to be displeased--with Nancy--but, upon my word; but
indeed--What shall I say?--Yet this I will say, that you good young
gentlemen know nothing at all of our sex. Shall I tell you--but why
should I? And yet I will, that if Nancy did not think well of you upon
the main, she is too generous to treat you so freely as she does.--Don't
you think she has courage enough to tell me, she would not see you, and
to refuse at any time seeing you, as she knows on what account you come,
if she had not something in her head favourable to you?--Fie! that I am
forced to say thus much in writing, when I have hinted it to you twenty
and twenty times by word of mouth!

But if you are so indifferent, Mr. Hickman--if you think you can part
with her for her skittish tricks--if my interest in your favour--Why,
Mr. Hickman, I must tell you that my Nancy is worth bearing with. If she
be foolish--what is that owing to?--Is it not to her wit? Let me tell
you, Sir, you cannot have the convenience without the inconvenience.
What workman loves not a sharp tool to work with? But is there not more
danger from a sharp tool than from a blunt one? And what workman will
throw away a sharp tool, because it may cut his fingers? Wit may be
likened to a sharp tool. And there is something very pretty in wit, let
me tell you. Often and often have I been forced to smile at her arch
turns upon me, when I could have beat her for them. And, pray, don't I
bear a great deal from her?--And why? because I love her. And would you
not wish me to judge of your love for her by my own? And would not you
bear with her?--Don't you love her (what though with another sort of
love?) as well as I do? I do assure you, Sir, that if I thought you did
not--Well, but it is plain that you don't!--And is it plain that you
don't?--Well, then, you must do as you think best.

Well might the merit of your passion be doubted, you say, if, like Mr.
Solmes--fiddle-faddle!--Why, you are a captious man, I think!--Has Nancy
been so plain in her repulses of you as Miss Clary Harlowe has been to
Mr. Solmes?--Does Nancy love any man better than you, although she may
not shew so much love to you as you wish for?--If she did, let me tell
you, she would have let us all hear of it.--What idle comparisons then!

But it mat be you are tired out. It may be you have seen somebody
else--it may be you would wish to change mistresses with that gay wretch
Mr. Lovelace. It may be too, that, in that case, Nancy would not be
sorry to change lovers--The truly-admirable Miss Clarissa Harlowe!--Good
lack!-but take care, Mr. Hickman, that you do not praise any woman
living, let her be as admirable and as excellent as she will, above your
own mistress. No polite man will do that, surely. And take care
too, that you do not make her or me think you are in earnest in your
anger--just though it may be, as anger only--I would not for a thousand
pounds, that Nancy should know that you can so easily part with her, if
you have the love for her which you declare you have. Be sure, if you
are not absolutely determined, that you do not so much as whisper the
contents of this your letter to your own heart, as I may say.

Her treatment of you, you say, does no credit either to her education
or fine sense. Very home put, truly! Nevertheless, so say I. But is not
hers the disgrace, more than yours? I can assure you, that every body
blames her for it. And why do they blame her?--Why? because they think
you merit better treatment at her hands: And is not this to your credit?
Who but pities you, and blames he? Do the servants, who, as you observe,
see her skittish airs, disrespect you for them? Do they not, at such
times, look concerned for you? Are they not then doubly officious in
their respects and services to you?--I have observed, with pleasure,
that they are.

But you are afraid you shall be thought tame, perhaps, when married.
That you shall not be though manly enough, I warrant!--And this was poor
Mr. Howe's fear. And many a tug did this lordly fear cost us both, God
knows!--Many more than needed, I am sure:--and more than ought to have
been, had he known how to bear and forbear; as is the duty of those who
pretend to have most sense--And, pray, which would you have to have most
sense, the woman or the man?

Well, Sir, and now what remains, if you really love Nancy so well as you
say you do?--Why, I leave that to you. You may, if you please, come to
breakfast with me in the morning. But with no full heart, nor resenting
looks, I advise you; except you can brave it out. That have I, when
provoked, done many a time with my husband, but never did I get any
thing by it with my daughter: much less will you. Of which, for your
observation, I thought fit to advise you. As from

Your friend, Anabella Howe.




LETTER XXIV

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING.


I will now take some notice of your last favour. But being so far
behind-hand with you, must be brief.

In the first place, as to your reproofs, thus shall I discharge myself
of that part of my subject. Is it likely, think you, that I should avoid
deserving them now-and-then, occasionally, when I admire the manner in
which you give me your rebukes, and love you the better for them? And
when you are so well entitled to give them? For what faults can you
possibly have, unless your relations are so kind as to find you a few to
keep their many in countenance?--But they are as king to me in this, as
to you; for I may venture to affirm, That any one who should read
your letters, and would say you were right, would not on reading mine,
condemn me for them quite wrong.

Your resolution not to leave your father's house is right--if you can
stay in it, and avoid being Solmes's wife.

I think you have answered Solmes's letter, as I should have answered
it.--Will you not compliment me and yourself at once, by saying, that
was right?

You have, in your letters to your uncle and the rest, done all that you
ought to do. You are wholly guiltless of the consequence, be it what it
will. To offer to give up your estate!--That would not I have done! You
see this offer staggered them: they took time to consider of it. They
made my heart ache in the time they took. I was afraid they would have
taken you at your word: and so, but for shame, and for fear of Lovelace,
I dare say they would. You are too noble for them. This, I repeat, is an
offer I would not have made. Let me beg of you, my dear, never to repeat
the temptation to them.

I freely own to you, that their usage of you upon it, and Lovelace's
different treatment of you* in his letter received at the same time,
would have made me his, past redemption. The duce take the man, I was
going to say, for not having so much regard to his character and morals,
as would have entirely justified such a step in a CLARISSA, persecuted
as she is!


     * See Letter XVIII.


I wonder not at your appointment with him. I may further touch upon some
part of this subject by-and-by.

Pray--pray--I pray you now, my dearest friend, contrive to send your
Betty Banes to me!--Does the Coventry Act extend to women, know ye?--The
least I will do, shall be, to send her home well soused in and dragged
through our deepest horsepond. I'll engage, if I get her hither, that
she will keep the anniversary of her deliverance as long as she lives.

I wonder not at Lovelace's saucy answer, saucy as it really is.* If he
loves you as he ought, he must be vexed at so great a disappointment.
The man must have been a detestable hypocrite, I think, had he not shown
his vexation. Your expectations of such a christian command of temper
in him, in a disappointment of this nature especially, are too early by
almost half a century in a man of his constitution. But nevertheless I
am very far from blaming you for your resentment.


     * See Letter XX.


I shall be all impatience to know how this matter ends between you and
him. But a few inches of brick wall between you so lately; and now such
mountains?--And you think to hold it?--May be so!

You see, you say, that the temper he shewed in his letter was not
natural to him. Wretched creepers and insinuators! Yet when opportunity
serves, as insolent encroachers!--This very Hickman, I make no doubt,
would be as saucy as your Lovelace, if he dared. He has not half the
arrogant bravery of the other, and can better hide his horns; that's
all. But whenever he has the power, depend upon it, he will butt at one
as valiantly as the other.

If ever I should be persuaded to have him, I shall watch how the
obsequious lover goes off; and how the imperative husband comes upon
him; in short, how he ascends, and how I descend, in the matrimonial
wheel, never to take my turn again, but by fits and starts like the
feeble struggles of a sinking state for its dying liberty.

All good-natured men are passionate, says Mr. Lovelace. A pretty plea
to a beloved object in the plenitude of her power! As much as to say,
'Greatly I value you, Madam, I will not take pains to curb my passions
to oblige you'--Methinks I should be glad to hear from Mr. Hickman such
a plea for good nature as this.

Indeed, we are too apt to make allowances for such tempers as early
indulgence has made uncontroulable; and therefore habitually evil. But
if a boisterous temper, when under obligation, is to be thus allowed
for, what, when the tables are turned, will it expect? You know a
husband, who, I fancy, had some of these early allowances made for him:
and you see that neither himself nor any body else is the happier for
it.

The suiting of the tempers of two persons who are to come together, is
a great matter: and there should be boundaries fixed between them, by
consent as it were, beyond which neither should go: and each should hold
the other to it; or there would probably be encroachment in both. To
illustrate my assertion by a very high, and by a more manly (as some
would think it) than womanly instance--if the boundaries of the
three estates that constitute our political union were not known,
and occasionally asserted, what would become of the prerogatives and
privileges of each? The two branches of the legislature would encroach
upon each other; and the executive power would swallow up both.

But if two persons of discretion, you'll say, come together--

Ay, my dear, that's true: but, if none but persons of discretion were
to marry--And would it not surprise you if I were to advance, that the
persons of discretion are generally single?--Such persons are apt
to consider too much, to resolve.--Are not you and I complimented as
such?--And would either of us marry, if the fellows and our friends
would let us alone?

But to the former point;--had Lovelace made his addresses to me, (unless
indeed I had been taken with a liking for him more than conditional,)
I would have forbid him, upon the first passionate instance of his
good-nature, as he calls it, ever to see me more: 'Thou must bear with
me, honest friend, might I have said [had I condescended to say any
thing to him] an hundred times more than this:--Begone, therefore!--I
bear with no passions that are predominant to that thou has pretended
for me!'

But to one of your mild and gentle temper, it would be all one, were
you married, whether the man were a Lovelace or a Hickman in his
spirit.--You are so obediently principled, that perhaps you would have
told a mild man, that he must not entreat, but command; and that it
was beneath him not to exact from you the obedience you had so solemnly
vowed to him at the altar.--I know of old, my dear, your meek regard
to that little piddling part of the marriage-vow which some
prerogative-monger foisted into the office, to make that a duty, which
he knew was not a right.

Our way of training-up, you say, makes us need the protection of the
brave. Very true: And how extremely brave and gallant is it, that this
brave man will free us from all insults but those which will go nearest
to our hearts; that is to say, his own!

How artfully has Lovelace, in the abstract you give me of one of
his letters, calculated to your meridian! Generous spirits hate
compulsion!--He is certainly a deeper creature by much than once we
thought him. He knows, as you intimate, that his own wild pranks cannot
be concealed: and so owns just enough to palliate (because it teaches
you not to be surprised at) any new one, that may come to your ears; and
then, truly, he is, however faulty, a mighty ingenuous man; and by no
means an hypocrite: a character the most odious of all others, to our
sex, in a lover, and the least to be forgiven, were it only because,
when detected, it makes us doubt the justice of those praises which we
are willing to believe he thought to be our due.

By means of this supposed ingenuity, Lovelace obtains a praise, instead
of a merited dispraise; and, like an absolved confessionaire, wipes off
as he goes along one score, to begin another: for an eye favourable
to him will not see his faults through a magnifying glass; nor will a
woman, willing to hope the best, forbear to impute it to ill-will and
prejudice all that charity can make so imputable. And if she even give
credit to such of the unfavourable imputations as may be too flagrant
to be doubted, she will be very apt to take in the future hope, which
he inculcates, and which to question would be to question her own power,
and perhaps merit: and thus may a woman be inclined to make a slight,
even a fancied merit atone for the most glaring vice.

I have a reason, a new one, for this preachment upon a text you have
given me. But, till I am better informed, I will not explain myself.
If it come out, as I shrewdly suspect it will, the man, my dear, is a
devil; and you must rather think of--I protest I had like to have said
Solmes than him.

But let this be as it will, shall I tell you, how, after all his
offences, he may creep in with you again?

I will. Thus then: It is but to claim for himself the good-natured
character: and this, granted, will blot out the fault of passionate
insolence: and so he will have nothing to do, but this hour to
accustom you to insult; the next, to bring you to forgive him, upon
his submission: the consequence must be, that he will, by this teazing,
break your resentment all to pieces: and then, a little more of the
insult, and a little less of the submission, on his part, will go down,
till nothing else but the first will be seen, and not a bit of the
second. You will then be afraid to provoke so offensive a spirit: and
at last will be brought so prettily, and so audibly, to pronounce the
little reptile word OBEY, that it will do one's heart good to hear you.
The Muscovite wife then takes place of the managed mistress. And if
you doubt the progression, be pleased, my dear, to take your mother's
judgment upon it.

But no more of this just now. Your situation is become too critical to
permit me to dwell upon these sort of topics. And yet this is but an
affected levity with me. My heart, as I have heretofore said, is a
sincere sharer in all your distresses. My sun-shine darts but through
a drizly cloud. My eye, were you to see it, when it seems to you so
gladdened, as you mentioned in a former, is more than ready to overflow,
even at the very passages perhaps upon which you impute to me the
archness of exultation.

But now the unheard-of cruelty and perverseness of some of your friends
[relations, I should say--I am always blundering thus!] the as strange
determinedness of others; your present quarrel with Lovelace; and your
approaching interview with Solmes, from which you are right to apprehend
a great deal; are such considerable circumstances in your story, that it
is fit they should engross all my attention.

You ask me to advise you how to behave upon Solmes's visit. I cannot for
my life. I know they expect a great deal from it: you had not else had
your long day complied with. All I will say is, That if Solmes cannot
be prevailed for, now that Lovelace has so much offended you, he never
will. When the interview is over, I doubt not but that I shall have
reason to say, that all you did, that all you said, was right, and could
not be better: yet, if I don't think so, I won't say so; that I promise
you.

Only let me advise you to pull up a spirit, even to your uncle, if there
be occasion. Resent the vile and foolish treatment you meet with, in
which he has taken so large a share, and make him ashamed of it, if you
can.

I know not, upon recollection, but this interview may be a good thing
for you, however designed. For when Solmes sees (if that be to be so)
that it is impossible he should succeed with you; and your relations see
it too; the one must, I think, recede, and the other come to terms with
you, upon offers, that it is my opinion, will go hard enough with you to
comply with; when the still harder are dispensed with.

There are several passages in your last letters, as well as in your
former, which authorize me to say this. But it would be unseasonable to
touch this subject farther just now.

But, upon the whole, I have no patience to see you thus made sport of
your brother's and sister's cruelty: For what, after so much steadiness
on your part, in so many trials, can be their hope? except indeed it be
to drive you to extremity, and to ruin you in the opinion of your uncles
as well as father.

I urge you by all means to send out of their reach all the letters
and papers you would not have them see. Methinks, I would wish you to
deposit likewise a parcel of clothes, linen, and the like, before your
interview with Solmes: lest you should not have an opportunity for it
afterwards. Robin shall fetch it away on the first orders by day or by
night.

I am in hopes to procure from my mother, if things come to extremity,
leave for you to be privately with us.

I will condition to be good-humoured, and even kind, to HER favourite,
if she will shew me an indulgence that shall make me serviceable to
MINE.

This alternative has been a good while in my head. But as your foolish
uncle has so strangely attached my mother to their views, I cannot
promise that I shall succeed as I wish.

Do not absolutely despair, however. What though the contention will be
between woman and woman? I fancy I shall be able to manage it, by the
help of a little female perseverance. Your quarrel with Lovelace, if
it continue, will strengthen my hands. And the offers you made in your
answer to your uncle Harlowe's letter of Sunday night last, duly dwelt
upon, must add force to my pleas.

I depend upon your forgiveness of all the perhaps unseasonable
flippancies of your naturally too lively, yet most sincerely
sympathizing, ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, MARCH 31.


You have very kindly accounted for your silence. People in misfortune
are always in doubt. They are too apt to turn even unavoidable accidents
into slights and neglects; especially in those whose favourable opinion
they wish to preserve.

I am sure I ought evermore to exempt my Anna Howe from the supposed
possibility of her becoming one of those who bask only in the sun-shine
of a friend: but nevertheless her friendship is too precious to me, not
to doubt my own merits on the one hand, and not to be anxious for the
preservation of it, on the other.

You so generously gave me liberty to chide you, that I am afraid of
taking it, because I could sooner mistrust my own judgment, than that of
a beloved friend, whose ingenuousness in acknowledging an imputed error
seems to set her above the commission of a wilful one. This makes
me half-afraid to ask you, if you think you are not too cruel, too
ungenerous shall I say? in your behaviour to a man who loves you so
dearly, and is so worthy and so sincere a man?

Only it is by YOU, or I should be ashamed to be outdone in that true
magnanimity, which makes one thankful for the wounds given by a true
friend. I believe I was guilty of a petulance, which nothing but my
uneasy situation can excuse; if that can. I am but almost afraid to beg
of you, and yet I repeatedly do, to give way to that charming spirit,
whenever it rises to your pen, which smiles, yet goes to the quick of my
fault. What patient shall be afraid of a probe in so delicate a hand?--I
say, I am almost afraid to pray you to give way to it, for fear you
should, for that very reason, restrain it. For the edge may be taken
off, if it does not make the subject of its raillery wince a little.
Permitted or desired satire may be apt, in a generous satirist, mending
as it rallies, to turn too soon into panegyric. Yours is intended to
instruct; and though it bites, it pleases at the same time: no fear of a
wound's wrankling or festering by so delicate a point as you carry;
not envenomed by personality, not intending to expose, or ridicule, or
exasperate. The most admired of our moderns know nothing of this art:
Why? Because it must be founded in good nature, and directed by a right
heart. The man, not the fault, is generally the subject of their satire:
and were it to be just, how should it be useful; how should it answer
any good purpose; when every gash (for their weapon is a broad sword,
not a lancet) lets in the air of public ridicule, and exasperates where
it should heal? Spare me not therefore because I am your friend. For
that very reason spare me not. I may feel your edge, fine as it is. I
may be pained: you would lose you end if I were not: but after the first
sensibility (as I have said more than once before) I will love you the
better, and my amended heart shall be all yours; and it will then be
more worthy to be yours.

You have taught me what to say to, and what to think of, Mr. Lovelace.
You have, by agreeable anticipation, let me know how it is probable he
will apply to me to be excused. I will lay every thing before you that
shall pass on the occasion, if he do apply, that I may take your advice,
when it can come in time; and when it cannot, that I may receive your
correction, or approbation, as I may happen to merit either.--Only one
thing must be allowed for me; that whatever course I shall be permitted
or be forced to steer, I must be considered as a person out of her own
direction. Tost to and fro by the high winds of passionate controul,
(and, as I think, unseasonable severity,) I behold the desired port,
the single state, into which I would fain steer; but am kept off by
the foaming billows of a brother's and sister's envy, and by the raging
winds of a supposed invaded authority; while I see in Lovelace, the
rocks on one hand, and in Solmes, the sands on the other; and tremble,
lest I should split upon the former, or strike upon the latter.

But you, my better pilot, to what a charming hope do you bid me aspire,
if things come to extremity!--I will not, as you caution me, too much
depend upon your success with your mother in my favour; for well I know
her high notions of implicit duty in a child: but yet I will hope too;
because her seasonable protection may save me perhaps from a greater
rashness: and in this case, she shall direct me in all my ways: I will
do nothing but by her orders, and by her advice and yours: not see
any body: not write to any body: nor shall any living soul, but by her
direction and yours, know where I am. In any cottage place me, I will
never stir out, unless, disguised as your servant, I am now-and-then
permitted an evening-walk with you: and this private protection to be
granted for no longer time than till my cousin Morden comes; which, as I
hope, cannot be long.

I am afraid I must not venture to take the hint you give me, to deposit
some of my clothes; although I will some of my linen, as well as papers.

I will tell you why--Betty had for some time been very curious about my
wardrobe, whenever I took out any of my things before her.

Observing this, I once, on taking one of my garden-airings, left my keys
in the locks: and on my return surprised the creature with her hand upon
the keys, as if shutting the door.

She was confounded at my sudden coming back. I took no notice: but on
her retiring, I found my cloaths were not in the usual order.

I doubted not, upon this, that her curiosity was owing to the orders she
had received; and being afraid they would abridge me of my airings, if
their suspicions were not obviated, it has ever since been my custom
(among other contrivances) not only to leave my keys in the locks, but
to employ the wench now-and-then in taking out my cloaths, suit by suit,
on pretence of preventing their being rumpled or creased, and to see
that the flowered silver suit did not tarnish: sometimes declaredly to
give myself employment, having little else to do. With which employment
(superadded to the delight taken by the low as well as by the high of
our sex in seeing fine cloaths) she seemed always, I thought, as well
pleased as if it answered one of the offices she had in charge.

To this, and to the confidence they have in a spy so diligent, and
to their knowing that I have not one confidant in a family in which
nevertheless I believe every servant loves me; nor have attempted
to make one; I suppose, I owe the freedom I enjoy of my airings: and
perhaps (finding I make no movements towards going away) they are the
more secure, that I shall at last be prevailed upon to comply with
their measures: since they must think, that, otherwise, they give me
provocation enough to take some rash step, in order to free myself
from a treatment so disgraceful; and which [God forgive me, if I judge
amiss!] I am afraid my brother and sister would not be sorry to drive me
to take.

If, therefore, such a step should become necessary, (which I yet hope
will not,) I must be contented to go away with the clothes I shall
have on at the time. My custom to be dressed for the day, as soon as
breakfast is over, when I have had no household employments to prevent
me, will make such a step (if I am forced to take it) less suspected.
And the linen I shall deposit, in pursuance of your kind hint, cannot be
missed.

This custom, although a prisoner, (as I may too truly say,) and neither
visited nor visiting, I continue. We owe to ourselves, and to our sex,
you know, to be always neat; and never to be surprised in a way we
should be pained to be seen in.

Besides, people in adversity (which is the state of trial of every good
quality) should endeavour to preserve laudable customs, that, if sun
shine return, they may not be losers by their trial.

Does it not, moreover, manifest a firmness of mind, in an unhappy
person, to keep hope alive? To hope for better days, is half to deserve
them: for could we have just ground for such a hope, if we did not
resolve to deserve what that hope bids us aspire to?--Then who shall
befriend a person who forsakes herself?

These are reflections by which I sometimes endeavour to support myself.

I know you don't despise my grave airs, although (with a view no doubt
to irradiate my mind in my misfortunes) you rally me upon them. Every
body has not your talent of introducing serious and important lessons,
in such a happy manner as at once to delight and instruct.

What a multitude of contrivances may not young people fall upon, if the
mind be not engaged by acts of kindness and condescension! I am not used
by my friends of late as I always used their servants.

When I was intrusted with the family-management, I always found it
right, as well in policy as generosity, to repose a trust in them. Not
to seem to expect or depend upon justice from them, is in a manner to
bid them to take opportunities, whenever they offer, to be unjust.

Mr. Solmes, (to expatiate on this low, but not unuseful subject,) in his
more trifling solicitudes, would have had a sorry key-keeper in me. Were
I mistress of a family, I would not either take to myself, or give to
servants, the pain of keeping those I had reason to suspect. People low
in station have often minds not sordid. Nay, I have sometimes thought,
that (even take number for number) there are more honest low people,
than honest high. In the one, honest is their chief pride. In the other,
the love of power, of grandeur, of pleasure, mislead; and that and their
ambition induce a paramount pride, which too often swallows up the more
laudable one.

Many of the former would scorn to deceive a confidence. But I have seen,
among the most ignorant of their class, a susceptibility of resentment,
if their honesty has been suspected: and have more than once been forced
to put a servant right, whom I have heard say, that, although she valued
herself upon her honesty, no master or mistress should suspect her for
nothing.

How far has the comparison I had in my head, between my friends
treatment of me, and my treatment of the servants, carried me!--But we
always allowed ourselves to expatiate on such subjects, whether low
or high, as might tend to enlarge our minds, or mend our management,
whether notional or practical, and whether such expatiating respected
our present, or might respect our probable future situations.

What I was principally leading to, was to tell you how ingenious I am in
my contrivances and pretences to blind my gaoleress, and to take off the
jealousy of her principals on my going down so often into the garden and
poultry-yard. People suspiciously treated are never I believe at a loss
for invention. Sometimes I want air, and am better the moment I am out
of my chamber.--Sometimes spirits; and then my bantams and pheasants or
the cascade divert me; the former, by their inspiring liveliness; the
latter, by its echoing dashes, and hollow murmurs.--Sometimes, solitude
is of all things my wish; and the awful silence of the night, the
spangled element, and the rising and setting sun, how promotive of
contemplation!--Sometimes, when I intend nothing, and expect no letters,
I am officious to take Betty with me; and at others, bespeak her
attendance, when I know she is otherwise employed, and cannot give it
me.

These more capital artifices I branch out into lesser ones, without
number. Yet all have not only the face of truth, but are real truths;
although not my principal motive. How prompt a thing is will!--What
impediments does dislike furnish!--How swiftly, through every
difficulty, do we move with the one!--how tardily with the other!--every
trifling obstruction weighing us down, as if lead were fastened to our
feet!


FRIDAY MORNING, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

I have already made up my parcel of linen. My heart ached all the time
I was employed about it; and still aches, at the thoughts of its being a
necessary precaution.

When the parcel comes to your hands, as I hope it safely will, you will
be pleased to open it. You will find in it two parcels sealed up; one
of which contains the letters you have not yet seen; being those written
since I left you: in the other are all the letters and copies of letters
that have passed between you and me since I was last with you; with some
other papers on subjects so much above me, that I cannot wish them to be
seen by any body whose indulgence I am not so sure of, as I am of yours.
If my judgment ripen with my years, perhaps I may review them.

Mrs. Norton used to say, from her reverend father, that youth was the
time of life for imagination and fancy to work in: then, were a writer
to lay by his works till riper years and experience should direct the
fire rather to glow, than to flame out; something between both might
perhaps be produced that would not displease a judicious eye.

In a third division, folded up separately, are all Mr. Lovelace's
letters written to me since he was forbidden this house, and copies
of my answers to them. I expect that you will break the seals of this
parcel, and when you have perused them all, give me your free opinion of
my conduct.

By the way, not a line from that man!--Not one line! Wednesday I
deposited mine. It remained there on Wednesday night. What time it was
taken away yesterday I cannot tell: for I did not concern myself about
it, till towards night; and then it was not there. No return at ten this
day. I suppose he is as much out of humour as I.--With all my heart.

He may be mean enough perhaps, if ever I should put it into his power,
to avenge himself for the trouble he has had with me.--But that now, I
dare say, I never shall.

I see what sort of a man the encroacher is. And I hope we are equally
sick of one another.--My heart is vexedly easy, if I may so describe
it.--Vexedly--because of the apprehended interview with Solmes, and the
consequences it may be attended with: or else I should be quite easy;
for why? I have not deserved the usage I receive: and could I be rid of
Solmes, as I presume I am of Lovelace, their influence over my father,
mother, and uncles, against me, could not hold.

The five guineas tied up in one corner of a handkerchief under the
linen, I beg you will let pass as an acknowledgement for the trouble
I give your trusty servant. You must not chide me for this. You know I
cannot be easy unless I have my way in these little matters.

I was going to put up what little money I have, and some of my
ornaments; but they are portable, and I cannot forget them. Besides,
should they (suspecting me) desire to see any of the jewels, and were
I not able to produce them, it would amount to a demonstration of an
intention which would have a guilty appearance to them.


FRIDAY, ONE O'CLOCK, IN THE WOOD-HOUSE.

No letter yet from this man! I have luckily deposited my parcel, and
have your letter of last night. If Robert take this without the parcel,
pray let him return immediately for it. But he cannot miss it, I think:
and must conclude that it is put there for him to take away. You may
believe, from the contents of yours, that I shall immediately write
again.--

CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXVI

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 30.


The fruits of my inquiry after your abominable wretch's behaviour and
baseness at the paltry alehouse, which he calls an inn, prepare to hear.

Wrens and sparrows are not too ignoble a quarry for this villainous
gos-hawk!--His assiduities; his watchings; his nightly risques; the
inclement weather he journeys in; must not be all placed to your
account. He has opportunities of making every thing light to him of
that sort. A sweet pretty girl, I am told--innocent till he went
thither--Now! (Ah! poor girl!) who knows what?

But just turned of seventeen!--His friend and brother-rake (a man of
humour and intrigue) as I am told, to share the social bottle with.
And sometimes another disguised rake or two. No sorrow comes near their
hearts. Be not disturbed, my dear, at his hoarsenesses! his pretty,
Betsey, his Rosebud, as the vile wretch calls her, can hear all he says.

He is very fond of her. They say she is innocent even yet--her father,
her grandmother, believe her to be so. He is to fortune her out to a
young lover!--Ah! the poor young lover!--Ah! the poor simple girl!

Mr. Hickman tells me, that he heard in town, that he used to be often
at plays, and at the opera, with women; and every time with a different
one--Ah! my sweet friend!--But I hope he is nothing to you, if all this
were truth.--But this intelligence, in relation to this poor girl, will
do his business, if you had been ever so good friends before.

A vile wretch! Cannot such purity in pursuit, in view, restrain him? but
I leave him to you!--There can be no hope of him. More of a fool,
than of such a man. Yet I wish I may be able to snatch the poor young
creature out of his villainous paws. I have laid a scheme to do so; if
indeed she be hitherto innocent and heart-free.

He appears to the people as a military man, in disguise, secreting
himself on account of a duel fought in town; the adversary's life in
suspense. They believe he is a great man. His friend passes for an
inferior officer; upon a footing of freedom with him. He, accompanied by
a third man, who is a sort of subordinate companion to the second. The
wretch himself with but one servant.

O my dear! how pleasantly can these devils, as I must call them, pass
their time, while our gentle bosoms heave with pity for their supposed
sufferings for us!


*****


I have sent for this girl and her father; and am just now informed, that
I shall see them. I will sift them thoroughly. I shall soon find out
such a simple thing as this, if he has not corrupted her already--and if
he has, I shall soon find out that too.--If more art than nature appears
either in her or her father, I shall give them both up--but depend upon
it, the girl's undone.

He is said to be fond of her. He places her at the upper end of his
table. He sets her a-prattling. He keeps his friends at a distance from
her. She prates away. He admires for nature all she says. Once was heard
to call her charming little creature! An hundred has he called so no
doubt. He puts her upon singing. He praises her wild note--O my dear,
the girl's undone!--must be undone!--The man, you know, is LOVELACE.

Let 'em bring Wyerley to you, if they will have you married--any body
but Solmes and Lovelace be yours!--So advises

Your ANNA HOWE.

My dearest friend, consider this alehouse as his garrison: him as an
enemy: his brother-rakes as his assistants and abettors. Would not your
brother, would not your uncles, tremble, if they knew how near them he
is, as they pass to and fro?--I am told, he is resolved you shall not be
carried to your uncle Antony's.--What can you do, with or without such
an enterprising--

Fill up the blank I leave.--I cannot find a word bad enough




LETTER XXVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, THREE O'CLOCK.


You incense, alarm, and terrify me, at the same time.--Hasten, my
dearest friend, hasten to me what further intelligence you can gather
about this vilest of men.

But never talk of innocence, of simplicity, and this unhappy girl,
together! Must she not know, that such a man as that, dignified in his
very aspect; and no disguise able to conceal his being of condition;
must mean too much, when he places her at the upper end of his table,
and calls her by such tender names? Would a girl, modest as simple,
above seventeen, be set a-singing at the pleasure of such a man as
that? a stranger, and professedly in disguise!--Would her father and
grandmother, if honest people, and careful of their simple girl, permit
such freedoms?

Keep his friend at a distance from her!--To be sure his designs are
villainous, if they have not been already effected.

Warn, my dear, if not too late, the unthinking father, of his child's
danger. There cannot be a father in the world, who would sell his
child's virtue. Nor mother!--The poor thing!

I long to hear the result of your intelligence. You shall see the simple
creature, you tell me.--Let me know what sort of a girl she is.--A sweet
pretty girl! you say. A sweet pretty girl, my dear!--They are sweet
pretty words from your pen. But are they yours or his of her?--If she be
so simple, if she have ease and nature in her manner, in her speech, and
warbles prettily her wild notes, why, such a girl as that must
engage such a profligate wretch, (as now indeed I doubt this man is,)
accustomed, perhaps, to town women, and their confident ways.--Must
deeply and for a long season engage him: since perhaps when her
innocence is departed, she will endeavour by art to supply the loss of
the natural charms which now engage him.

Fine hopes of such a wretch's reformation! I would not, my dear, for the
world, have any thing to say--but I need not make resolutions. I have
not opened, nor will I open, his letter.--A sycophant creature!--With
his hoarsenesses--got perhaps by a midnight revel, singing to his wild
note singer, and only increased in the coppice!

To be already on a footing!--In his esteem, I mean: for myself, I
despise him. I hate myself almost for writing so much about him, and of
such a simpleton as this sweet pretty girl as you call her: but no one
can be either sweet or pretty, that is not modest, that is not virtuous.

And now, my dear, I will tell you how I came to put you upon this
inquiry.

This vile Joseph Leman had given a hint to Betty, and she to me, as if
Lovelace would be found out to be a very bad man, at a place where he
had been lately seen in disguise. But he would see further, he said,
before he told her more; and she promised secrecy, in hope to get at
further intelligence. I thought it could be no harm, to get you to
inform yourself, and me, of what could be gathered.* And now I see, his
enemies are but too well warranted in their reports of him: and, if the
ruin of this poor young creature be his aim, and if he had not known her
but for his visits to Harlowe-place, I shall have reason to be doubly
concerned for her; and doubly incensed against so vile a man.


     * It will be seen in Vol.I.Letter XXXIV. that Mr. Lovelace's
     motive for sparing his Rosebud was twofold. First, Because
     his pride was gratified by the grandmother's desiring him to
     spare her grand-daughter. Many a pretty rogue, say he, had I
     spared, whom I did not spare, had my power been
     acknowledged, and my mercy in time implored. But the
     debellare superbos should be my motto, were I to have a new
     one.

     His other motive will be explained in the following passage,
     in the same. I never was so honest, for so long together,
     says he, since my matriculation. It behoves me so to be.
     Some way or other my recess [at the little inn] may be found
     out, and it then will be thought that my Rosebud has
     attracted me. A report in my favour, from simplicities so
     amiable, may establish me, &c.

     Accordingly, as the reader will hereafter see, Mr. Lovelace
     finds by the effects, his expectations from the contrivance
     he set on foot by means of his agent Joseph Leman (who
     plays, as above, upon Betty Barnes) fully answered, though
     he could not know what passed on the occasion between the
     two ladies.

     This explanation is the more necessary to be given, as
     several of our readers (through want of due attention) have
     attributed to Mr. Lovelace, on his behaviour to his Rosebud,
     a greater merit than was due to him; and moreover imagined,
     that it was improbable, that a man, who was capable of
     acting so generously (as they supposed) in this instance,
     should be guilty of any atrocious vileness. Not considering,
     that love, pride, and revenge as he owns in Vol.I.Letter
     XXXI. were ingredients of equal force in his composition;
     and that resistance was a stimulus to him.


I think I hate him worse than I do Solmes himself.

But I will not add one more word about hi,; and after I have told you,
that I wish to know, as soon as possible what further occurs from your
inquiry. I have a letter from him; but shall not open it till I do:
and then, if it come out as I dare say it will, I will directly put the
letter unopened into the place I took it from, and never trouble myself
more about him. Adieu, my dearest friend.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXVIII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE. FRIDAY NOON, MARCH 31.


Justice obliges me to forward this after my last on the wings of the
wind, as I may say. I really believe the man is innocent. Of this
one accusation, I think he must be acquitted; and I am sorry I was so
forward in dispatching away my intelligence by halves.

I have seen the girl. She is really a very pretty, a very neat, and,
what is still a greater beauty, a very innocent young creature. He who
could have ruined such an undersigned home-bred, must have been
indeed infernally wicked. Her father is an honest simple man; entirely
satisfied with his child, and with her new acquaintance.

I am almost afraid for your heart, when I tell you, that I find, now I
have got to the bottom of this inquiry, something noble come out in this
Lovelace's favour.

The girl is to be married next week; and this promoted and brought about
by him. He is resolved, her father says, to make one couple happy,
and wishes he could make more so [There's for you, my dear!] And she
professes to love, he has given her an hundred pounds: the grandmother
actually has it in her hands, to answer to the like sum given to the
youth by one of his own relation: while Mr. Lovelace's companion,
attracted by the example, has given twenty-five guineas to the father,
who is poor, towards clothes to equip the pretty rustic.

Mr. Lovelace and his friend, the poor man says, when they first came to
his house, affected to appear as persons of low degree; but now he knows
the one (but mentioned it in confidence) to be Colonel Barrow, the other
Captain Sloane. The colonel he owns was at first very sweet upon his
girl: but her grandmother's begging of him to spare her innocence, he
vowed, that he never would offer any thing but good counsel to her. He
kept his word; and the pretty fool acknowledged, that she never
could have been better instructed by the minister himself from the
bible-book!--The girl pleased me so well, that I made her visit to me
worth her while.

But what, my dear, will become of us now?--Lovelace not only reformed,
but turned preacher!--What will become of us now?--Why, my sweet friend,
your generosity is now engaged in his favour!--Fie upon this generosity!
I think in my heart, that it does as much mischief to the noble-minded,
as love to the ignobler.--What before was only a conditional liking, I
am now afraid will turn to liking unconditional.

I could not endure to change my invective into panegyric all at once,
and so soon. We, or such as I at least, love to keep ourselves in
countenance for a rash judgment, even when we know it to be rash.
Everybody has not your generosity in confessing a mistake. It requires
a greatness of soul frankly to do it. So I made still further inquiry
after his life and manner, and behaviour there, in hopes to find
something bad: but all uniform!

Upon the whole, Mr. Lovelace comes out with so much advantage from this
inquiry, that were there the least room for it, I should suspect the
whole to be a plot set on foot to wash a blackamoor white. Adieu, my
dear.

ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SATURDAY, APRIL 1.


Hasty censures do indeed subject themselves to the charge of
variableness and inconsistency in judgment: and so they ought; for,
if you, even you, my dear, were so loth to own a mistake, as in the
instance before us you pretend you were, I believe I should not have
loved you so well as I really do love you. Nor could you, in that case,
have so frankly thrown the reflection I hint at upon yourself, have not
your mind been one of the most ingenuous that ever woman boasted.

Mr. Lovelace has faults enow to deserve very severe censure, although
he be not guilty of this. If I were upon such terms with him as he could
wish me to be, I should give him such a hint, that this treacherous
Joseph Leman cannot be so much attached to him, as perhaps he thinks
him to be. If it were, he would not have been so ready to report to his
disadvantage (and to Betty Barnes too) this slight affair of the pretty
rustic. Joseph has engaged Betty to secrecy; promising to let her, and
her young master, to know more, when he knows the whole of the matter:
and this hinders her from mentioning it, as she is nevertheless agog to
do, to my sister or brother. And then she does not choose to disoblige
Joseph; for although she pretends to look above him, she listens, I
believe, to some love-stories he tells her.

Women having it not in their power to begin a courtship, some of them
very frequently, I believe, lend an ear where their hearts incline not.

But to say no more of these low people, neither of whom I think
tolerably of; I must needs own, that as I should for ever have despised
this man, had he been capable of such a vile intrigue in his way to
Harlowe-place, and as I believe he was capable of it, it has indeed [I
own it has] proportionably engaged my generosity, as you call it, in his
favour: perhaps more than I may have reason to wish it had. And, rally
me as you will, pray tell me fairly, my dear, would it not have had such
an effect upon you?

Then the real generosity of the act.--I protest, my beloved friend,
if he would be good for the rest of his life from this time, I would
forgive him a great many of his past errors, were it only for the
demonstration he has given in this, that he is capable of so good and
bountiful a manner of thinking.

You may believe I made no scruple to open his letter, after the receipt
of your second on this subject: nor shall I of answering it, as I have
no reason to find fault with it: an article in his favour, procured
him, however, so much the easier, (I must own,) by way of amends for the
undue displeasure I took against him; though he knows it not.

Is it lucky enough that this matter was cleared up to me by your
friendly diligence so soon: for had I written before it was, it would
have been to reinforce my dismission of him; and perhaps I should have
mentioned the very motive; for it affected me more than I think it
ought: and then, what an advantage would that have given him, when he
could have cleared up the matter so happily for himself!

When I send you this letter of his, you will see how very humble he is:
what acknowledgements of natural impatience: what confession of faults,
as you prognosticated.

A very different appearance, I must own, all these make, now the story
of the pretty rustic is cleared up, to what they would have made, had it
not.

You will see how he accounts to me, 'That he could not, by reason of
indisposition, come for my letter in person: and the forward creature
labours the point, as if he thought I should be uneasy that he did not.'
I am indeed sorry he should be ill on my account; and I will allow, that
the suspense he has been in for some time past, must have been vexatious
enough to so impatient a spirit. But all is owing originally to himself.

You will find him (in the presumption of being forgiven) 'full of
contrivances and expedients for my escaping my threatened compulsion.'

I have always said, that next to being without fault, is the
acknowledgement of a fault; since no amendment can be expected where an
error is defended: but you will see in this very letter, an haughtiness
even in his submissions. 'Tis true, I know not where to find fault as
to the expression; yet cannot I be satisfied, that his humility is
humility; or even an humility upon such conviction as one should be
pleased with.

To be sure, he is far from being a polite man: yet is not directly and
characteristically, as I may say, unpolite. But his is such a sort of
politeness, as has, by a carelessness founded on very early indulgence,
and perhaps on too much success in riper years, and an arrogance built
upon both, grown into assuredness, and, of course, I may say, into
indelicacy.

The distance you recommend at which to keep these men, is certainly
right in the main: familiarity destroys reverence: But with whom?--Not
with those, surely, who are prudent, grateful, and generous.

But it is very difficult for persons, who would avoid running into one
extreme, to keep clear of another. Hence Mr. Lovelace, perhaps, thinks
it the mark of a great spirit to humour his pride, though at the expense
of his politeness: but can the man be a deep man, who knows not how to
make such distinctions as a person of but moderate parts cannot miss?

He complains heavily of my 'readiness to take mortal offence at him, and
to dismiss him for ever: it is a high conduct, he says, he must be frank
enough to tell me; a conduct that must be very far from contributing to
allay his apprehensions of the possibility that I may be prosecuted into
my relations' measures in behalf of Mr. Solmes.'

You will see how he puts his present and his future happiness, 'with
regard to both worlds, entirely upon me.' The ardour with which he vows
and promises, I think the heart only can dictate: how else can one guess
at a man's heart?

You will also see, 'that he has already heard of the interview I am to
have with Mr. Solmes;' and with what vehemence and anguish he expresses
himself on the occasion. I intend to take proper notice of the ignoble
means he stoops to, to come at his early intelligence of our family.
If persons pretending to principle, bear not their testimony against
unprincipled actions, what check can they have?

You will see, 'how passionately he presses me to oblige him with a few
lines, before the interview between Mr. Solmes and me takes place, (if,
as he says, it must take place,) to confirm his hope, that I have no
view, in my present displeasure against him, to give encouragement to
Solmes. An apprehension, he says, that he must be excused for repeating;
especially as the interview is a favour granted to that man, which
I have refused to him; since, as he infers, were it not with such an
expectation, why should my friends press it?'


*****


I have written; and to this effect: 'That I had never intended to write
another line to a man, who could take upon himself to reflect upon my
sex and myself, for having thought fit to make use of my own judgment.

'I tell him, that I have submitted to the interview with Mr. Solmes,
purely as an act of duty, to shew my friends, that I will comply with
their commands as far as I can; and that I hope, when Mr. Solmes himself
shall see how determined I am, he will cease to prosecute a suit, in
which it is impossible he should succeed with my consent.

'I assure him, that my aversion to Mr. Solmes is too sincere to permit
me to doubt myself on this occasion. But, nevertheless, he must not
imagine, that my rejecting of Mr. Solmes is in favour to him. That I
value my freedom and independency too much, if my friends will but leave
me to my own judgment, to give them up to a man so uncontroulable, and
who shews me beforehand what I have to expect from him, were I in his
power.

'I express my high disapprobation of the methods he takes to come
at what passes in a private family. The pretence of corrupting other
people's servants, by way of reprisal for the spies they have set upon
him, I tell him, is a very poor excuse; and no more than an attempt to
justify one meanness by another.

'There is, I observe to him, a right and a wrong in every thing, let
people put what glosses they please upon their action. To condemn a
deviation, and to follow it by as great a one, what, I ask him, is this,
but propagating a general corruption?--A stand must be made somebody,
turn round the evil as many as may, or virtue will be lost: And shall it
not be I, a worthy mind would ask, that shall make this stand?

'I leave him to judge, whether his be a worthy one, tried by this rule:
And whether, knowing the impetuosity of his own disposition, and the
improbability there is that my father and family will ever be reconciled
to him, I ought to encourage his hopes?

'These spots and blemishes, I further tell him, give me not earnestness
enough for any sake but his own, to wish him in a juster and nobler
train of thinking and acting; for that I truly despised many of the ways
he allows himself in: our minds are therefore infinitely different:
and as to his professions of reformation, I must tell him, that
profuse acknowledgements, without amendment, are but to me as so many
anticipating concessions, which he may find much easier to make, thane
either to defend himself, or amend his errors.

'I inform him, that I have been lately made acquainted' [and so I have
by Betty, and she by my brother] 'with the weak and wanton airs he gives
himself of declaiming against matrimony. I severely reprehend him on
this occasion: and ask him, with what view he can take so witless, so
despicable a liberty, in which only the most abandoned of men allow
themselves, and yet presume to address me?


'I tell him, that if I am obliged to go to my uncle Antony's, it is not
to be inferred, that I must therefore necessarily be Mr. Solmes's wife:
since I must therefore so sure perhaps that the same exceptions lie
so strongly against my quitting a house to which I shall be forcibly
carried, as if I left my father's house: and, at the worst, I may be
able to keep them in suspense till my cousin Morden comes, who will have
a right to put me in possession of my grandfather's estate, if I insist
upon it.'

This, I doubt, is somewhat of an artifice; which can only be excusable,
as it is principally designed to keep him out of mischief. For I have
but little hope, if carried thither, whether sensible or senseless,
absolutely if I am left to the mercy of my brother and sister, but they
will endeavour to force the solemn obligation upon me. Otherwise, were
there but any prospect of avoiding this, by delaying (or even by taking
things to make me ill, if nothing else would do,) till my cousin comes,
I hope I should not think of leaving even my uncle's house. For I should
not know how to square it to my own principles, to dispense with the
duty I owe to my father, wherever it shall be his will to place me.

But while you give me the charming hope, that, in order to avoid one
man, I shall not be under the necessity of throwing myself upon the
friends of the other; I think my case not desperate.


*****


I see not any of my family, nor hear from them in any way of kindness.
This looks as if they themselves expected no great matters from the
Tuesday's conference which makes my heart flutter every time I think of
it.

My uncle Antony's presence on the occasion I do not much like: but I
had rather meet him than my brother or sister: yet my uncle is very
impetuous. I can't think Mr. Lovelace can be much more so; at least he
cannot look angry, as my uncle, with his harder features, can. These
sea-prospered gentlemen, as my uncle has often made me think, not used
to any but elemental controul, and even ready to buffet that, bluster
often as violently as the winds they are accustomed to be angry at.

I believe Mr. Solmes will look as much like a fool as I shall do, if it
be true, as my uncle Harlowe writes, and as Betty often tells me, that
he is as much afraid of seeing me, as I am of seeing him.

Adieu, my happy, thrice-happy Miss Howe, who have no hard terms fixed
to your duty!--Who have nothing to do, but to fall in with a choice your
mother has made for you, to which you have not, nor can have, a just
objection: except the frowardness of our sex, as our free censurers
would perhaps take the liberty to say, makes it one, that the choice was
your mother's, at first hand. Perverse nature, we know, loves not to
be prescribed to; although youth is not so well qualified, either by
sedateness or experience, to choose for itself.

To know your own happiness, and that it is now, nor to leave it to after
reflection to look back upon the preferable past with a heavy and self
accusing heart, that you did not choose it when you might have chosen
it, is all that is necessary to complete your felicity!--And this power
is wished you by

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXX

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SATURDAY, APRIL 2.


I ought yesterday to have acknowledged the receipt of your parcel. Robin
tells me, that the Joseph Leman, whom you mention as the traitor, saw
him. He was in the poultry-yard, and spoke to Robin over the bank
which divides that from the green-lane. 'What brings you hither, Mr.
Robert?--But I can tell. Hie away, as fast as you can.'

No doubt but their dependence upon this fellow's vigilance, and upon
Betty's, leaves you more at liberty in your airings, than you would
otherwise be. But you are the only person I ever heard of, who in such
circumstances had not some faithful servant to trust little offices to.
A poet, my dear, would not have gone to work for an Angelica, without
giving her her Violetta, her Cleante, her Clelia, or some such
pretty-named confidant--an old nurse at the least.

I read to my mother several passages of your letters. But your last
paragraph, in your yesterday's quite charmed her. You have won her heart
by it, she told me. And while her fit of gratitude for it lasted, I was
thinking to make my proposal, and to press it with all the earnestness
I could give it, when Hickman came in, making his legs, and stroking his
cravat and ruffles.

I could most freely have ruffled him for it. As it was--Sir, said I, saw
you not some of the servants?--Could not one of them have come in before
you?

He begged pardon: looked as if he knew not whether he had best keep his
ground, or withdraw:--Till my mother, his fast friend, interposed--Why,
Nancy, we are not upon particulars.--Pray, Mr. Hickman, sit down.

By your le--ave, good Madam, to me. You know his drawl, when his muscles
give him the respectful hesitation.--

Ay, ay, pray sit down, honest man, if you are weary--but by mamma,
if you please. I desire my hoop may have its full circumference. All
they're good for, that I know, is to clean dirty shoes, and to keep
fellows at a distance.

Strange girl! cried my mother, displeased; but with a milder turn, ay,
ay, Mr. Hickman, sit down by me: I have no such forbidding folly in my
dress.

I looked serious; and in my heart was glad this speech of hers was not
made to your uncle Antony.

My mother, with the true widow's freedom, would mighty prudently have
led into the subject we had been upon; and would have had read to him, I
question not, that very paragraph in your letter which is so much in
his favour. He was highly obliged to dear Miss Harlowe, she would assure
him; that she did say--

But I asked him, if he had any news by his last letters from London?--A
question which he always understands to be a subject changer; for
otherwise I never put it. And so if he be but silent, I am not angry
with him that he answers it not.

I choose not to mention my proposal before him, till I know how it will
be relished by my mother. If it be not well received, perhaps I may
employ him on the occasion. Yet I don't like to owe him an obligation,
if I could help it. For men who have his views in their heads, do so
parade it, so strut about, if a woman condescend to employ them in her
affairs, that one has no patience with them.

However, if I find not an opportunity this day, I will make one
to-morrow.

I shall not open either of your sealed-up parcels, but in your presence.
There is no need. Your conduct is out of all question with me: and by
the extracts you have given me from his letters and your own, I know all
that relates to the present situation of things between you.

I was going to give you a little flippant hint or two. But since you
wish to be thought superior to all our sex in the command of yourself;
and since indeed you deserve to be thought so; I will spare you. You
are, however, at times, more than half inclined to speak out. That
you do not, is only owing to a little bashful struggle between you and
yourself, as I may say. When that is quite got over, I know you will
favour me undisguisedly with the result.

I cannot forgive your taking upon me (at so extravagant a rate too) to
pay my mother's servants. Indeed I am, and I will be, angry with you for
it. A year's wages at once well nigh! only as, unknown to my mother, I
make it better for the servants according to their merits--how it made
the man stare!--And it may be his ruin too, as far as I know. If he
should buy a ring, and marry a sorry body in the neighbourhood with the
money, one would be loth, a twelvemonth hence, that the poor old fellow
should think he had reason to wish the bounty never conferred.

I MUST give you your way in these things, you say.--And I know there is
no contradicting you: for you were ever putting too great a value upon
little offices done for you, and too little upon the great ones you do
for others. The satisfaction you have in doing so, I grant it, repays
you. But why should you, by the nobleness of your mind, throw reproaches
upon the rest of the world? particularly, upon your own family--and upon
ours too?

If, as I have heard you say, it is a good rule to give WORDS the
hearing, but to form our judgment of men and things by DEEDS ONLY;
what shall we think of one, who seeks to find palliatives in words, for
narrowness of heart in the very persons her deeds so silently, yet so
forcibly, reflect upon? Why blush you not, my dear friend, to be thus
singular?--When you meet with another person whose mind is like your
own, then display your excellencies as you please: but till then,
for pity's sake, let your heart and your spirit suffer a little
contradiction.

I intended to write but a few lines; chiefly to let you know your
parcels are come safe. And accordingly I began in a large hand; and I
am already come to the end of my second sheet. But I could write a quire
without hesitation upon a subject so copious and so beloved as is your
praise. Not for this single instance of your generosity; since I am
really angry with you for it; but for the benevolence exemplified in
the whole tenor of your life and action; of which this is but a common
instance. Heaven direct you, in your own arduous trials, is all I have
room to add; and make you as happy, as you think to be

Your own ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXXI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY NIGHT, APRIL 2.


I have many new particulars to acquaint you with, that shew a great
change in the behaviour of my friends as I find we have. I will give
these particulars to you as they offered.

All the family was at church in the morning. They brought good Dr. Lewen
with them, in pursuance of a previous invitation. And the doctor sent up
to desire my permission to attend me in my own apartment.

You may believe it was easily granted.

So the doctor came up.

We had a conversation of near an hour before dinner: but, to my
surprise, he waved every thing that would have led me to the subject I
supposed he wanted to talk about. At last, I asked him, if it were not
thought strange I should be so long absent from church? He made me some
handsome compliments upon it: but said, for his part, he had ever made
it a rule to avoid interfering in the private concerns of families,
unless desired to do so.

I was prodigiously disappointed; but supposing that he was thought too
just a man to be made a judge of in this cause; I led no more to it:
nor, when he was called down to dinner, did he take the least notice of
leaving me behind him there.

But this was not the first time since my confinement that I thought it a
hardship not to dine below. And when I parted with him on the stairs, a
tear would burst its way; and he hurried down; his own good-natured eyes
glistening; for he saw it.--Nor trusted he his voice, lest the accent I
suppose should have discovered his concern; departing in silence; though
with his usual graceful obligingness.

I hear that he praised me, and my part in the conversation that
passed between us. To shew them, I suppose, that it was not upon the
interesting subjects which I make no doubt he was desired not to enter
upon.

He left me so dissatisfied, yet so perplexed with this new way of
treatment, that I never found myself so much disconcerted, and out of my
train.

But I was to be more so. This was to be a day of puzzle to me. Pregnant
puzzle, if I may say so: for there must great meaning lie behind it.

In the afternoon, all but my brother and sister went to church with
the good doctor; who left his compliments for me. I took a walk in the
garden. My brother and sister walked in it too, and kept me in their
eye a good while, on purpose, as I thought, that I might see how gay and
good-humoured they were together. At last they came down the walk that I
was coming up, hand-in-hand, lover-like.

Your servant, Miss--your servant, Sir--passed between my brother and me.

Is it not coldish, Clary! in a kinder voice than usual, said my sister,
and stopped.--I stopped and courtesied low to her half-courtesy.--I
think not, Sister, said I.

She went on. I courtesied without return; and proceeded, turning to my
poultry-yard.

By a shorter turn, arm-in-arm, they were there before me.

I think, Clary, said my brother, you must present me with some of this
breed, for Scotland.

If you please, Brother.

I'll choose for you, said my sister.

And while I fed them, they pointed to half a dozen: yet intending
nothing by it, I believe, but to shew a deal of love and good-humour to
each other before me.

My uncles next, (at their return from church) were to do me the honour
of their notice. They bid Betty tell me, they would drink tea with me
in my own apartment. Now, thought I, shall I have the subject of next
Tuesday enforced upon me.

But they contradicted the order for tea, and only my uncle Harlowe came
up to me.

Half-distant, half-affectionate, at his entering my chamber, was the
air he put on to his daughter-niece, as he used to call me; and I threw
myself at his feet, and besought his favour.

None of these discomposures, Child. None of these apprehensions. You
will now have every body's favour. All is coming about, my dear. I was
impatient to see you. I could no longer deny myself this satisfaction.
He then raised me, and kissed me, and called me charming creature!

But he waved entering into any interesting subject. All will be well
now. All will be right!--No more complainings! every body loves you!--I
only came to make my earliest court to you! [were his condescending
words] and to sit and talk of twenty and twenty fond things, as I used
to do. And let every past disagreeable thing be forgotten; as if nothing
had happened.

He understood me as beginning to hint at the disgrace of my
confinement--No disgrace my dear can fall to your lot: your reputation
is too well established.--I longed to see you, repeated me--I have seen
nobody half so amiable since I saw you last.

And again he kissed my cheek, my glowing cheek; for I was impatient,
I was vexed, to be thus, as I thought, played upon: And how could I be
thankful for a visit, that (it was now evident) was only a too humble
artifice, to draw me in against the next Tuesday, or to leave me
inexcusable to them all?

O my cunning brother!--This is his contrivance. And then my anger made
me recollect the triumph in his and my sister's fondness for each other,
as practised before me; and the mingled indignation flashing from their
eyes, as arm-in-arm they spoke to me, and the forced condescension
playing upon their lips, when they called me Clary, and Sister.

Do you think I could, with these reflections, look upon my uncle
Harlowe's visit as the favour he seemed desirous I should think it
to be?--Indeed I could not; and seeing him so studiously avoid all
recrimination, as I may call it, I gave into the affectation; and
followed him in his talk of indifferent things: while he seemed to
admire this thing and that, as if he had never seen them before; and
now-and then condescendingly kissed the hand that wrought some of the
things he fixed his eyes upon; not so much to admire them, as to find
subjects to divert what was most in his head, and in my heart.

At his going away--How can I leave you here by yourself, my dear? you,
whose company used to enliven us all. You are not expected down indeed:
but I protest I had a good mind to surprise your father and mother!--If
I thought nothing would arise that would be disagreeable--My dear!
my love! [O the dear artful gentleman! how could my uncle Harlowe so
dissemble?] What say you? Will you give me your hands? Will you see your
father? Can you stand his displeasure, on first seeing the dear creature
who has given him and all of us so much disturbance? Can you promise
future--

He saw me rising in my temper--Nay, my dear, interrupting himself, if
you cannot be all resignation, I would not have you think of it.

My heart, struggling between duty and warmth of temper, was full. You
know, my dear, I never could bear to be dealt meanly with!--How--how can
you, Sir! you my Papa-uncle--How can you, Sir!--The poor girl!--for I
could not speak with connexion.

Nay, my dear, if you cannot be all duty, all resignation--better stay
where you are.--But after the instance you have given--

Instance I have given!--What instance, Sir?

Well, well, Child, better stay where you are, if your past confinement
hangs so heavy upon you--but now there will be a sudden end to
it--Adieu, my dear!--Three words only--Let your compliance be
sincere!--and love me, as you used to love me--your Grandfather did not
do so much for you, as I will do for you.

Without suffering me to reply, he hurried away, as I thought, like one
who has been employed to act a part against his will, and was glad it
was over.


Don't you see, my dear Miss Howe, how they are all determined?--Have I
not reason to dread next Tuesday?


Up presently after came my sister:--to observe, I suppose, the way I was
in.

She found me in tears.

Have you not a Thomas a Kempis, Sister? with a stiff air.

I have, Madam.

Madam!--How long are we to be at this distance, Clary?

No longer, my dear Bella, if you allow me to call you sister. And I took
her hand.

No fawning neither, Girl!

I withdrew my hand as hastily, as you may believe I should have done,
had I, in feeling for one of your parcels under the wood, been bitten by
a viper.

I beg pardon, said I,--Too-too ready to make advances, I am always
subjecting myself to contempts.

People who know not how to keep a middle behaviour, said she, must ever
do so.

I will fetch you the Kempis, Sister. I did. Here it is. You will find
excellent things, Bella, in that little book.

I wish, retorted she, you had profited by them.

I wish you may, said I. Example from a sister older than one's self is a
fine thing.

Older! saucy little fool!--And away she flung.

What a captious old woman will my sister make, if she lives to be
one!--demanding the reverence, perhaps, yet not aiming at the merit; and
ashamed of the years that can only entitle her to the reverence.

It is plain, from what I have related, that they think they have got me
at some advantage by obtaining my consent to the interview: but if it
were not, Betty's impertinence just now would make it evident. She has
been complimenting me upon it; and upon the visit of my uncle Harlowe.
She says, the difficulty now is more than half over with me. She is
sure I would not see Mr. Solmes, but to have him. Now shall she be soon
better employed than of late she has been. All hands will be at work.
She loves dearly to have weddings go forward!--Who knows, whose turn
will be next?

I found in the afternoon a reply to my answer to Mr. Lovelace's letter.
It is full of promises, full of vows of gratitude, of eternal gratitude,
is his word, among others still more hyperbolic. Yet Mr. Lovelace, the
least of any man whose letters I have seen, runs into those elevated
absurdities. I should be apt to despise him for it, if he did. Such
language looks always to me, as if the flatterer thought to find a woman
a fool, or hoped to make her one.

'He regrets my indifference to him; which puts all the hope he has in my
favour upon the shocking usage I receive from my friends.

'As to my charge upon him of unpoliteness and uncontroulableness--What
[he asks] can he say? since being unable absolutely to vindicate
himself, he has too much ingenuousness to attempt to do so: yet is
struck dumb by my harsh construction, that his acknowledging temper
is owing more to his carelessness to defend himself, than to his
inclination to amend. He had never before met with the objections
against his morals which I had raised, justly raised: and he was
resolved to obviate them. What is it, he asks, that he has promised, but
reformation by my example? And what occasion for the promise, if he
had not faults, and those very great ones, to reform? He hopes
acknowledgement of an error is no bad sign; although my severe virtue
has interpreted it into one.

'He believes I may be right (severely right, he calls it) in my judgment
against making reprisals in the case of the intelligence he receives
from my family: he cannot charge himself to be of a temper that leads
him to be inquisitive into any body's private affairs; but hopes, that
the circumstances of the case, and the strange conduct of my friends,
will excuse him; especially when so much depends upon his knowing the
movements of a family so violently bent, by measures right or wrong, to
carry their point against me, in malice to him. People, he says, who act
like angels, ought to have angels to deal with. For his part, he has not
yet learned the difficult lesson of returning good for evil: and shall
think himself the less encouraged to learn it by the treatment I have
met with from the very persons who would trample upon him, as they do
upon me, were he to lay himself under their feet.

'He excuses himself for the liberties he owns he has heretofore taken in
ridiculing the marriage-state. It is a subject, he says, that he has not
of late treated so lightly. He owns it to be so trite, so beaten a
topic with all libertines and witlings; so frothy, so empty, so nothing
meaning, so worn-out a theme, that he is heartily ashamed of himself,
ever to have made it his. He condemns it as a stupid reflection upon the
laws and good order of society, and upon a man's own ancestors: and
in himself, who has some reason to value himself upon his descent
and alliances, more censurable, than in those who have not the same
advantages to boast of. He promises to be more circumspect than ever,
both in his words and actions, that he may be more and more worthy of
my approbation; and that he may give an assurance before hand, that a
foundation is laid in his mind for my example to work upon with equal
reputation and effect to us both;--if he may be so happy to call me his.

'He gives me up, as absolutely lost, if I go to my uncle Antony's; the
close confinement; the moated house; the chapel; the implacableness of
my brother and sister; and their power over the rest of the family,
he sets forth in strong lights; and plainly says, that he must have a
struggle to prevent my being carried thither.'

Your kind, your generous endeavours to interest your mother in my
behalf, will, I hope, prevent those harsher extremities to which I might
be otherwise driven. And to you I will fly, if permitted, and keep all
my promises, of not corresponding with any body, not seeing any body,
but by your mother's direction and yours.

I will close and deposit at this place. It is not necessary to say, how
much I am

Your ever affectionate and obliged CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE


I am glad my papers are safe in your hands. I will make it my endeavour
to deserve your good opinion, that I may not at once disgrace your
judgment, and my own heart.

I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. He is extremely apprehensive of
the meeting I am to have with Mr. Solmes to-morrow. He says, 'that the
airs that wretch gives himself on the occasion add to his concern; and
it is with infinite difficulty that he prevails upon himself not to make
him a visit to let him know what he may expect, if compulsion be used
towards me in his favour. He assures me, that Solmes has actually talked
with tradesmen of new equipages, and names the people in town with whom
he has treated: that he has even' [Was there ever such a horrid wretch!]
'allotted this and that apartment in his house, for a nursery, and other
offices.'

How shall I bear to hear such a creature talk of love to me? I shall be
out of all patience with him. Besides, I thought that he did not dare
to make or talk of these impudent preparations.--So inconsistent as such
are with my brother's views--but I fly the subject.

Upon this confidence of Solmes, you will less wonder at that of
Lovelace, 'in pressing me in the name of all his family, to escape
from so determined a violence as is intended to be offered to me at my
uncle's: that the forward contriver should propose Lord M.'s chariot and
six to be at the stile that leads up to the lonely coppice adjoining to
our paddock. You will see how audaciously he mentions settlements ready
drawn; horsemen ready to mount; and one of his cousins Montague to be
in the chariot, or at the George in the neighbouring village, waiting
to accompany me to Lord M.'s, or to Lady Betty's or Lady Sarah's, or to
town, as I please; and upon such orders, or conditions, and under such
restrictions, as to himself, as I shall prescribe.'

You will see how he threatens, 'To watch and waylay them, and to rescue
me as he calls it, by an armed force of friends and servants, if they
attempt to carry me against my will to my uncle's; and this, whether I
give my consent to the enterprise, or not:--since he shall have no hopes
if I am once there.'

O my dear friend! Who can think of these things, and not be extremely
miserable in her apprehensions!

This mischievous sex! What had I to do with any of them; or they
with me?--I had deserved this, were it by my own seeking, by my own
giddiness, that I had brought myself into this situation--I wish with
all my heart--but how foolish we are apt to wish when we find ourselves
unhappy, and know not how to help ourselves!

On your mother's goodness, however, is my reliance. If I can but avoid
being precipitated on either hand, till my cousin Morden arrives, a
reconciliation must follow; and all will be happy.

I have deposited a letter for Mr. Lovelace; in which 'I charge him, as
he would not disoblige me for ever, to avoid any rash step, any visit to
Mr. Solmes, which may be followed by acts of violence.'

I re-assure him, 'That I will sooner die than be that man's wife.

'Whatever be my usage, whatever shall be the result of the apprehended
interview, I insist upon it that he presume not to offer violence to
any of my friends: and express myself highly displeased, that he should
presume upon such an interest in my esteem, as to think himself entitled
to dispute my father's authority in my removal to my uncle's; although I
tell him, that I will omit neither prayers nor contrivance, even to the
making myself ill, to avoid going.'

To-morrow is Tuesday! How soon comes upon us the day we dread!--Oh that
a deep sleep of twenty four hours would seize my faculties!--But then
the next day would be Tuesday, as to all the effects and purposes for
which I so much dread it. If this reach you before the event of the so
much apprehended interview can be known, pray for

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY MORNING, SIX O'CLOCK.


The day is come!--I wish it were happily over. I have had a wretched
night. Hardly a wink have I slept, ruminating upon the approaching
interview. The very distance of time to which they consented, has added
solemnity to the meeting, which otherwise it would not have had.

A thoughtful mind is not a blessing to be coveted, unless it had such a
happy vivacity with it as yours: a vivacity, which enables a person to
enjoy the present, without being over-anxious about the future.


TUESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

I have had a visit from my aunt Hervey. Betty, in her alarming way, told
me, I should have a lady to breakfast with me, whom I little expected;
giving me to believe it was my mother. This fluttered me so much, on
hearing a lady coming up-stairs, supposing it was she, (and not knowing
how to account for her motives in such a visit, after I had been so long
banished from her presence,) that my aunt, at her entrance, took notice
of my disorder; and, after her first salutation,

Why, Miss, said she, you seem surprised.--Upon my word, you thoughtful
young ladies have strange apprehensions about nothing at all. What,
taking my hand, can be the matter with you?--Why, my dear, tremble,
tremble, tremble, at this rate? You'll not be fit to be seen by any
body. Come, my love, kissing my cheek, pluck up a courage. By this
needless flutter on the approaching interview, when it is over you will
judge of your other antipathies, and laugh at yourself for giving way to
so apprehensive an imagination.

I said, that whatever we strongly imagined, was in its effect at the
time more than imaginary, although to others it might not appear so:
that I had not rested one hour all night: that the impertinent set over
me, by giving me room to think my mother was coming up, had so much
disconcerted me, that I should be very little qualified to see any body
I disliked to see.

There was no accounting for these things, she said. Mr. Solmes last
night supposed he should be under as much agitation as I could be.

Who is it, then, Madam, that so reluctant an interview on both sides, is
to please?

Both of you, my dear, I hope, after the first flurries are over. The
most apprehensive beginnings, I have often known, make the happiest
conclusions.

There can be but one happy conclusion to the intended visit; and that
is, That both sides may be satisfied it will be the last.

She then represented how unhappy it would be for me, if I did not suffer
myself to be prevailed upon: she pressed me to receive Mr. Solmes
as became my education: and declared, that his apprehensions on the
expectation he had of seeing me, were owing to his love and his awe;
intimating, That true love is ever accompanied by fear and reverence;
and that no blustering, braving lover could deserve encouragement.

To this I answered, That constitution was to be considered: that a
man of spirit would act like one, and could do nothing meanly: that
a creeping mind would creep into every thing, where it had a view to
obtain a benefit by it; and insult, where it had power, and nothing to
expect: that this was not a point now to be determined with me: that
I had said as much as I could possibly say on the subject: that this
interview was imposed upon me: by those, indeed, who had a right to
impose it: but that it was sorely against my will complied with: and for
this reason, that there was aversion, not wilfulness, in the case; and
so nothing could come of it, but a pretence, as I much apprehended, to
use me still more severely than I had been used.

She was then pleased to charge me with prepossession and prejudice. She
expatiated upon the duty of a child. She imputed to me abundance of fine
qualities; but told me, that, in this case, that of persuadableness was
wanting to crown all. She insisted upon the merit of obedience, although
my will were not in it. From a little hint I gave of my still greater
dislike to see Mr. Solmes, on account of the freedom I had treated him
with, she talked to me of his forgiving disposition; of his infinite
respect for me; and I cannot tell what of this sort.

I never found myself so fretful in my life: and so I told my aunt; and
begged her pardon for it. But she said, it was well disguised then; for
she saw nothing but little tremors, which were usual with young ladies
when they were to see their admirers for the first time; and this might
be called so, with respect to me; since it was the first time I had
consented to see Mr. Solmes in that light--but that the next--

How, Madam, interrupted I--Is it then imagined, that I give this meeting
on that footing?

To be sure it is, Child.

To be sure it is, Madam! Then I do yet desire to decline it.--I will
not, I cannot, see him, if he expects me to see him upon those terms.

Niceness, punctilio, mere punctilio, Niece!--Can you think that your
appointment, (day, place, hour,) and knowing what the intent of it was,
is to be interpreted away as a mere ceremony, and to mean nothing?--Let
me tell you, my dear, your father, mother, uncles, every body, respect
this appointment as the first act of your compliance with their wills:
and therefore recede not, I desire you; but make a merit of what cannot
be avoided.

O the hideous wretch!--Pardon me, Madam.--I to be supposed to meet
such a man as that, with such a view! and he to be armed with such an
expectation!--But it cannot be that he expects it, whatever others may
do.--It is plain he cannot, by the fears he tell you all he shall have
to see me. If his hope were so audacious, he could not fear so much.

Indeed, he has this hope; and justly founded too. But his fear arises
from his reverence, as I told you before.

His reverence!--his unworthiness!--'Tis so apparent, that even he
himself sees it, as well as every body else. Hence his offers
to purchase me! Hence it is, that settlements are to make up for
acknowledged want of merit!

His unworthiness, say you!--Not so fast, my dear. Does not this look
like setting a high value upon yourself?--We all have exalted notions of
your merit, Niece; but nevertheless, it would not be wrong, if you were
to arrogate less to yourself; though more were to be your due than your
friends attribute to you.

I am sorry, Madam, it should be thought arrogance in me, to suppose I am
not worthy of a better man than Mr. Solmes, both as to person and mind:
and as to fortune, I thank God I despise all that can be insisted upon
in his favour from so poor a plea.

She told me, It signified nothing to talk: I knew the expectation of
every one.

Indeed I did not. It was impossible I could think of such a strange
expectation, upon a compliance made only to shew I would comply in all
that was in my power to comply with.

I might easily, she said, have supposed, that every one thought I was
beginning to oblige them all, by the kind behaviour of my brother and
sister to me in the garden, last Sunday; by my sister's visit to me
afterwards in my chamber (although both more stiffly received by me,
than were either wished or expected); by my uncle Harlowe's affectionate
visit to me the same afternoon, not indeed so very gratefully received
as I used to receive his favours:--but this he kindly imputed to the
displeasure I had conceived at my confinement, and to my intention to
come off by degrees, that I might keep myself in countenance for my past
opposition.

See, my dear, the low cunning of that Sunday-management, which then
so much surprised me! And see the reason why Dr. Lewen was admitted to
visit me, yet forbore to enter upon a subject about which I thought he
came to talk to me!--For it seems there was no occasion to dispute with
me on the point I was to be supposed to have conceded to.--See, also,
how unfairly my brother and sister must have represented their pretended
kindness, when (though the had an end to answer by appearing kind) their
antipathy to me seems to have been so strong, that they could not help
insulting me by their arm-in-arm lover-like behaviour to each other; as
my sister afterwards likewise did, when she came to borrow my Kempis.

I lifted up my hands and eyes! I cannot, said I, give this treatment a
name! The end so unlikely to be answered by means so low! I know whose
the whole is! He that could get my uncle Harlowe to contribute his part,
and to procure the acquiescence of the rest of my friends to it, must
have the power to do any thing with them against me.

Again my aunt told me, that talking and invective, now I had given the
expectation, would signify nothing. She hoped I would not shew every
one, that they had been too forward in their constructions of my desire
to oblige them. She could assure me, that it would be worse for me, if
now I receded, than if I had never advanced.

Advanced, Madam! How can you say advanced? Why, this is a trick upon
me! A poor low trick! Pardon me, Madam, I don't say you have a hand in
it.--But, my dearest Aunt, tell me, Will not my mother be present at
this dreaded interview? Will she not so far favour me? Were it but to
qualify--

Qualify, my dear, interrupted she--your mother, and your uncle Harlowe
would not be present on this occasion for the world--

O then, Madam, how can they look upon my consent to this interview as an
advance?

My aunt was displeased at this home-push. Miss Clary, said she, there is
no dealing with you. It would be happy for you, and for every body else,
were your obedience as ready as your wit. I will leave you--

Not in anger, I hope, Madam, interrupted I--all I meant was, to observe,
that let the meeting issue as it may, and as it must issue, it cannot be
a disappointment to any body.

O Miss! you seem to be a very determined young creature. Mr. Solmes
will be here at your time: and remember once more, that upon the coming
afternoon depend upon the peace of your whole family, and your own
happiness.

And so saying, down she hurried.

Here I will stop. In what way I shall resume, or when, is not left to
me to conjecture; much less determine. I am excessively uneasy!--No good
news from your mother, I doubt!--I will deposit thus far, for fear of
the worst.

Adieu, my best, rather, my only friend! CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE TUESDAY EVENING; AND CONTINUED
THROUGH THE NIGHT.

Well, my dear, I am alive, and here! but how long I shall be either
here, or alive, I cannot say. I have a vast deal to write; and perhaps
shall have little time for it. Nevertheless, I must tell you how the
saucy Betty again discomposed me, when she came up with this Solmes's
message; although, as you will remember from my last, I was in a way
before that wanted no additional surprises.

Miss! Miss! Miss! cried she, as fast as she could speak, with her arms
spread abroad, and all her fingers distended, and held up, will you be
pleased to walk down into your own parlour?--There is every body, I will
assure you in full congregation!--And there is Mr. Solmes, as fine as a
lord, with a charming white peruke, fine laced shirt and ruffles, coat
trimmed with silver, and a waistcoat standing on end with lace!--Quite
handsome, believe me!--You never saw such an alteration!--Ah! Miss,
shaking her head, 'tis pity you have said so much against him! but you
will know how to come off for all that!--I hope it will not be too late!

Impertinence! said I--Wert thou bid to come up in this fluttering
way?--and I took up my fan, and fanned myself.

Bless me! said she, how soon these fine young ladies will be put into
flusterations!--I mean not either to offend or frighten you, I am
sure.--

Every body there, do you say?--Who do you call every body?

Why, Miss, holding out her left palm opened, and with a flourish, and
a saucy leer, patting it with the fore finger of the other, at every
mentioned person, there is your papa!--there is your mamma!--there is
your uncle Harlowe!--there is your uncle Antony!--your aunt Hervey!--my
young lady!--and my young master!--and Mr. Solmes, with the air of a
great courtier, standing up, because he named you:--Mrs. Betty, said he,
[then the ape of a wench bowed and scraped, as awkwardly as I suppose
the person did whom she endeavoured to imitate,] pray give my humble
service to Miss, and tell her, I wait her commands.

Was not this a wicked wench?--I trembled so, I could hardly stand. I was
spiteful enough to say, that her young mistress, I supposed, bid her put
on these airs, to frighten me out of a capacity of behaving so calmly as
should procure me my uncles' compassion.

What a way do you put yourself in, Miss, said the insolent!--Come, dear
Madam, taking up my fan, which I had laid down, and approaching me with
it, fanning, shall I--

None of thy impertinence!--But say you, all my friends are below with
him? And am I to appear before them all?

I can't tell if they'll stay when you come. I think they seemed to be
moving when Mr. Solmes gave me his orders.--But what answer shall I
carry to the 'squire?

Say, I can't go!--but yet when 'tis over, 'tis over!--Say, I'll wait
upon--I'll attend--I'll come presently--say anything; I care not
what--but give me my fan, and fetch me a glass of water--

She went, and I fanned myself all the time; for I was in a flame; and
hemmed, and struggled with myself all I could; and, when she returned,
drank my water; and finding no hope presently of a quieter heart, I sent
her down, and followed her with precipitation; trembling so, that, had
I not hurried, I question if I could have got down at all.--Oh my dear,
what a poor, passive machine is the body when the mind is disordered!

There are two doors to my parlour, as I used to call it. As I entered
one, my friends hurried out the other. I just saw the gown of my sister,
the last who slid away. My uncle Antony went out with them: but he staid
not long, as you shall hear; and they all remained in the next parlour,
a wainscot partition only parting the two. I remember them both in one:
but they were separated in favour of us girls, for each to receive her
visitors in at her pleasure.

Mr. Solmes approached me as soon as I entered, cringing to the ground,
a visible confusion in every feature of his face. After half a dozen
choaked-up Madams,--he was very sorry--he was very much concerned--it
was his misfortune--and there he stopped, being unable presently to
complete a sentence.

This gave me a little more presence of mind. Cowardice in a foe begets
courage in one's self--I see that plainly now--yet perhaps, at bottom,
the new-made bravo is a greater coward than the other.

I turned from him, and seated myself in one of the fireside chairs,
fanning myself. I have since recollected, that I must have looked
very saucily. Could I have had any thoughts of the man, I should have
despised myself for it. But what can be said in the case of an aversion
so perfectly sincere?

He hemmed five or six times, as I had done above; and these produced a
sentence--that I could not but see his confusion. This sentence produced
two or three more. I believe my aunt had been his tutoress; for it was
his awe, his reverence for so superlative a Lady [I assure you!] And he
hoped--he hoped--three times he hoped, before he told me what--at
last it came out, that I was too generous (generosity, he said, was my
character) to despise him for such--for such--for such--true tokens of
his love.

I do indeed see you under some confusion, Sir; and this gives me hope,
that although I have been compelled, as I may call it, to give way
to this interview, it may be attended with happier effects than I had
apprehended from it.

He had hemmed himself into more courage.

You could not, Madam, imagine any creature so blind to your merits,
and so little attracted by them, as easily to forego the interest and
approbation he was honoured with by your worthy family, while he had
any hope given him, that one day he might, by his perseverance and zeal,
expect your favour.

I am but too much aware, Sir, that it is upon the interest and
approbation you mention, that you build such hope. It is impossible
otherwise, that a man, who has any regard for his own happiness, would
persevere against such declarations as I have made, and think myself
obliged to make, in justice to you, as well as to myself.

He had seen many instances, he told me, and had heard of more, where
ladies had seemed as averse, and yet had been induced, some by motives
of compassion, others by persuasion of friends, to change their minds;
and had been very happy afterwards: and he hoped this might be the case
here.

I have no notion, Sir, of compliment, in an article of such importance
as this: yet I am sorry to be obliged to speak my mind so plainly as I
am going to do.--Know then, that I have invincible objections, Sir, to
your address. I have avowed them with an earnestness that I believe is
without example: and why?--because I believe it is without example that
any young creature, circumstanced as I am, was ever treated as I have
been treated on your account.

It is hoped, Madam, that your consent may in time be obtained--that is
the hope; and I shall be a miserable man if it cannot.

Better, Sir, give me leave to say, you were miserable by yourself, than
that you should make two so.

You may have heard, Madam, things to my disadvantage. No man is without
enemies. Be pleased to let me know what you have heard, and I will
either own my faults, and amend; or I will convince you that I am basely
bespattered: and once I understand you overheard something that I should
say, that gave you offence: unguardedly, perhaps; but nothing but what
shewed my value, and that I would persist so long as I have hope.

I have indeed heard many things to your disadvantage:--and I was far
from being pleased with what I overheard fall from your lips: but as you
were not any thing to me, and never could be, it was not for me to be
concerned about the one or the other.

I am sorry, Madam, to hear this. I am sure you should not tell me of my
fault, that I would be unwilling to correct in myself.

Then, Sir, correct this fault--do not wish to have a young creature
compelled in the most material article of her life, for the sake of
motives she despises; and in behalf of a person she cannot value: one
that has, in her own right, sufficient to set her above all your offers,
and a spirit that craves no more than what it has, to make itself easy
and happy.

I don't see, Madam, how you would be happy, if I were to discontinue my
address: for--

That is nothing to you, Sir, interrupted I: do you but withdraw your
pretensions: and if it will be thought fit to start up another man for
my punishment, the blame will not lie at your door. You will be entitled
to my thanks, and most heartily will I thank you.

He paused, and seemed a little at a loss: and I was going to give him
still stronger and more personal instances of my plain-dealing; when in
came my uncle Antony.

So, Niece, so!--sitting in state like a queen, giving audience! haughty
audience!--Mr. Solmes, why stand you thus humbly?--Why this distance,
man? I hope to see you upon a more intimate footing before we part.

I arose, as soon as he entered--and approached him with a bend knee: Let
me, Sir, reverence my uncle, whom I have not for so long time seen!--Let
me, Sir, bespeak your favour and compassion.

You will have the favour of every body, Niece, when you know how to
deserve it.

If ever I deserved it, I deserve it now.--I have been hardly used!--I
have made proposals that ought to be accepted, and such as would not
have been asked of me. What have I done, that I must be banished and
confined thus disgracefully? that I must not be allowed to have any
free-will in an article that concerns my present and future happiness?--

Miss Clary, replied my uncle, you have had your will in every thing till
now; and this makes your parents' will sit so heavy upon you.

My will, Sir! be pleased to allow me to ask, what was my will till now,
but my father's will, and yours and my uncle Harlowe's will?--Has it not
been my pride to obey and oblige?--I never asked a favour, that I did
not first sit down and consider, if it were fit to be granted. And now,
to shew my obedience, have I not offered to live single?--Have I not
offered to divest myself of my grandfather's bounty, and to cast myself
upon my father's! and that to be withdrawn, whenever I disoblige him?
Why, dear, good Sir, am I to be made unhappy in a point so concerning my
happiness?

Your grandfather's estate is not wished from you. You are not desired
to live a single life. You know our motives, and we guess at yours. And,
let me tell you, well as we love you, we should much sooner choose to
follow you to the grave, than that yours should take place.

I will engage never to marry any man, without my father's consent, and
yours, Sir, and every body's. Did I ever give you cause to doubt my
word?--And here I will take the solemnest oath that can be offered me--

That is the matrimonial one, interrupted he, with a big voice--and to
this gentleman.--It shall, it shall, cousin Clary!--And the more you
oppose it, the worse it shall be for you.

This, and before the man, who seemed to assume courage upon it, highly
provoked me.

Then, Sir, you shall sooner follow me to the grave indeed.--I will
undergo the cruelest death--I will even consent to enter into that awful
vault of my ancestors, and have that bricked up upon me, rather than
consent to be miserable for life. And, Mr. Solmes, turning to him, take
notice of what I say: This or any death, I will sooner undergo [that
will quickly be over] than be yours, and for ever unhappy!

My uncle was in a terrible rage upon this. He took Mr. Solmes by the
hand, shocked as the man seemed to be, and drew him to the window--Don't
be surprised, Mr. Solmes, don't be concerned at this. We know, and rapt
out a sad oath, what women will say in their wrath: the wind is not more
boisterous, nor more changeable; and again he swore to that.--If you
think it worthwhile to wait for such an ungrateful girl as this, I'll
engage she'll veer about; I'll engage she shall. And a third time
violently swore to it.

Then coming up to me (who had thrown myself, very much disordered by my
vehemence, into the most distant window) as if he would have beat me;
his face violently working, his hands clinched, and his teeth set--Yes,
yes, yes, you shall, Cousin Clary, be Mr. Solmes's wife; we will see
that you shall; and this in one week at farthest.--And then a fourth
time he confirmed it!--Poor gentleman! how he swore!

I am sorry, Sir, said I, to see you in such a passion. All this, I am
but too sensible, is owing to my brother's instigation; who would not
himself give the instance of duty that is sought to be exacted from me.
It is best for me to withdraw. I shall but provoke you farther, I fear:
for although I would gladly obey you if I could, yet this is a point
determined with me; and I cannot so much as wish to get over it.

How could I avoid making these strong declarations, the man in presence?

I was going out at the door I came in at; the gentlemen looking upon one
another, as if referring to each other what to do, or whether to engage
my stay, or suffer me to go; and whom should I meet at the door but my
brother, who had heard all that had passed!

He bolted upon me so unexpectedly, that I was surprised. He took my
hand, and grasped it with violence: Return, pretty Miss, said he;
return, if you please. You shall not yet be bricked up. Your instigating
brother shall save you from that!--O thou fallen angel, said he, peering
up to my downcast face--such a sweetness here!--and such an obstinacy
there! tapping my neck--O thou true woman--though so young!--But you
shall not have your rake: remember that; in a loud whisper, as if he
would be decently indecent before the man. You shall be redeemed, and
this worthy gentleman, raising his voice, will be so good as to redeem
you from ruin--and hereafter you will bless him, or have reason to bless
him, for his condescension; that was the brutal brother's word!

He had led me up to meet Mr. Solmes, whose hand he took, as he held
mine. Here, Sir, said he, take the rebel daughter's hand: I give it you
now: she shall confirm the gift in a week's time; or will have neither
father, mother, nor uncles, to boast of.

I snatched my hand away.

How now, Miss--!

And how now, Sir!--What right have you to dispose of my hand?--If you
govern every body else, you shall not govern me; especially in a point
so immediately relative to myself, and in which you neither have, nor
ever shall have, any thing to do.

I would have broken from him; but he held my hand too fast.

Let me go, Sir!--Why am I thus treated?--You design, I doubt not, with
your unmanly gripings, to hurt me, as you do: But again I ask, wherefore
is it that I am to be thus treated by you?

He tossed my hand from him with a whirl, that pained my very shoulder. I
wept, and held my other hand to the part.

Mr. Solmes blamed him. So did my uncle.

He had no patience, he said, with such a perverse one; and to think of
the reflections upon himself, before he entered. He had only given me
back the hand I had not deserved he should touch. It was one of my arts
to pretend to be so pained.

Mr. Solmes said, he would sooner give up all his hopes of me, than that
I should be used unkindly.--And he offered to plead in my behalf to them
both; and applied himself with a bow, as if for my approbation of his
interposition.

Interpose not, Mr. Solmes, said I, to save me from my brother's
violence. I cannot wish to owe an obligation to a man whose ungenerous
perseverance is the occasion of that violence, and of all my disgraceful
sufferings.

How generous in you, Mr. Solmes, said my brother, to interpose so kindly
in behalf of such an immovable spirit! I beg of you to persist in your
address--the unnatural brother called it address!--For all our family's
sake, and for her sake too, if you love her, persist!--Let us save her,
if possible, from ruining herself. Look at her person! [and he gazed at
me, from head to foot, pointing at me, as he referred to Mr. Solmes,]
think of her fine qualities!--all the world confesses them, and we all
gloried in her till now. She is worth saving; and, after two or three
more struggles, she will be yours, and take my word for it, will reward
your patience. Talk not, therefore, of giving up your hopes, for a
little whining folly. She has entered upon a parade, which she knows
not how to quit with a female grace. You have only her pride and her
obstinacy to encounter: and depend upon it, you will be as happy a man
in a fortnight, as a married man can be.

You have heard me say, my dear, that my brother has always taken a
liberty to reflect upon our sex, and upon matrimony!--He would not, if
he did not think it wit to do so!--Just as poor Mr. Wyerley, and others,
whom we both know, profane and ridicule scripture; and all to evince
their pretensions to the same pernicious talent, and to have it thought
they are too wise to be religious.

Mr. Solmes, with a self-satisfied air, presumptuously said, he would
suffer every thing, to oblige my family, and to save me: and doubted not
to be amply rewarded, could he be so happy as to succeed at last.

Mr. Solmes, said I, if you have any regard for your own happiness, (mine
is out of the question with you, you have not generosity enough to make
that any part of your scheme,) prosecute no father your address, as my
brother calls it. It is but too just to tell you, that I could not bring
my heart so much as to think of you, without the utmost disapprobation,
before I was used as I have been:--And can you think I am such a slave,
such a poor slave, as to be brought to change my mind by the violent
usage I have met with?

And you, Sir, turning to my brother, if you think that meekness always
indicates tameness; and that there is no magnanimity without bluster;
own yourself mistaken for once: for you shall have reason to judge from
henceforth, that a generous mind is not to be forced; and that--

No more, said the imperious wretch, I charge you, lifting up his hands
and eyes. Then turning to my uncle, Do you hear, Sir? this is your once
faultless niece! This is your favourite!

Mr. Solmes looked as if he know not what to think of the matter; and had
I been left alone with him, I saw plainly I could have got rid of him
easily enough.

My uncle came to me, looking up also to my face, and down to my feet:
and is it possible this can be you? All this violence from you, Miss
Clary?

Yes, it is possible, Sir--and, I will presume to say, this vehemence on
my side is but the natural consequence of the usage I have met with, and
the rudeness I am treated with, even in your presence, by a brother, who
has no more right to controul me, than I have to controul him.

This usage, cousin Clary, was not till all other means were tried with
you.

Tried! to what end, Sir?--Do I contend for any thing more than a mere
negative? You may, Sir, [turning to Mr. Solmes,] possibly you may be
induced the rather to persevere thus ungenerously, as the usage I have
met with for your sake, and what you have now seen offered to me by my
brother, will shew you what I can bear, were my evil destiny ever to
make me yours.

Lord, Madam, cried Solmes, [all this time distorted into twenty
different attitudes, as my brother and my uncle were blessing
themselves, and speaking only to each other by their eyes, and by their
working features; Lord, Madam,] what a construction is this!

A fair construction, Sir, interrupted I: for he that can see a person,
whom he pretends to value, thus treated, and approve of it, must be
capable of treating her thus himself. And that you do approve of it,
is evident by your declared perseverance, when you know I am confined,
banished, and insulted, in order to make me consent to be what I never
can be: and this, let me tell you, as I have often told others, not from
motives of obstinacy, but aversion.

Excuse me, Sir, turning to my uncle--to you, as to my father's brother,
I owe duty. I beg your pardon, but my brother; he shall not constrain
me.--And [turning to the unnatural wretch--I will call him wretch] knit
your brows, Sir, and frown all you will, I will ask you, would you, in
my case, make the sacrifices I am willing to make, to obtain every one's
favour? If not, what right have you to treat me thus; and to procure me
to be treated as I have been for so long a time past?

I had put myself by this time into great disorder: they were silent, and
seemed by their looks to want to talk to one another (walking about in
violent disorders too) between whiles. I sat down fanning myself, (as
it happened, against the glass,) and I could perceive my colour go and
come; and being sick to the very heart, and apprehensive of fainting, I
rung.

Betty came in. I called for a glass of water, and drank it: but nobody
minded me. I heard my brother pronounce the words, Art! Female Art!
to Solmes; which, together with the apprehension that he would not be
welcome, I suppose kept him back. Else I could see the man was affected.
And (still fearing I should faint) I arose, and taking hold of Betty's
arm, let me hold by you, Betty, said I: let me withdraw. And moved
with trembling feet towards the door, and then turned about, and made a
courtesy to my uncle--Permit me, Sir, said I, to withdraw.

Whither go you, Niece? said my uncle: we have not done with you yet.
I charge you depart not. Mr. Solmes has something to open to you, that
will astonish you--and you shall hear it.

Only, Sir, by your leave, for a few minutes into the air. I will return,
if you command it. I will hear all that I am to hear; that it may be
over now and for ever.--You will go with me, Betty?

And so, without any farther prohibition, I retired into the garden; and
there casting myself upon the first seat, and throwing Betty's apron
over my face, leaning against her side, my hands between hers, I gave
way to a violent burst of grief, or passion, or both; which, as it
seemed, saved my heart from breaking, for I was sensible of an immediate
relief.

I have already given you specimens of Mrs. Betty's impertinence. I shall
not, therefore, trouble you with more: for the wench, notwithstanding
this my distress, took great liberties with me, after she saw me a
little recovered, and as I walked farther into the garden; insomuch
that I was obliged to silence her by an absolute prohibition of saying
another word to me; and then she dropped behind me sullen and gloomy.

It was near an hour before I was sent for in again. The messenger was
my cousin Dolly Hervey, who, with an eye of compassion and respect, (for
Miss Hervey always loved me, and calls herself my scholar, as you know,)
told my company was desired.

Betty left us.

Who commands my attendance, Miss? said I--Have you not been in tears, my
dear?

Who can forbid tears? said she.

Why, what is the matter, cousin Dolly?--Sure, nobody is entitled to weep
in this family, but me!

Yes, I am, Madam, said she, because I love you.

I kissed her: And is it for me, my sweet Cousin, that you shed
tears?--There never was love lost between us: but tell me, what is
designed to be done with me, that I have this kind instance of your
compassion for me?

You must take no notice of what I tell you, said the dear girl: but my
mamma has been weeping for you, too, with me; but durst not let any body
see it: O my Dolly, said my mamma, there never was so set a malice
in man as in your cousin James Harlowe. They will ruin the flower and
ornament of their family.

As how, Miss Dolly?--Did she not explain herself?--As how, my dear?

Yes; she said, Mr. Solmes would have given up his claim to you; for he
said, you hated him, and there were no hopes; and your mamma was willing
he should; and to have you taken at your word, to renounce Mr. Lovelace
and to live single. My mamma was for it too; for they heard all that
passed between you and uncle Antony, and cousin James; saying, it was
impossible to think of prevailing upon you to have Mr. Solmes. Uncle
Harlowe seemed in the same way of thinking; at least, my mamma says he
did not say any thing to the contrary. But your papa was immovable, and
was angry at your mamma and mine upon it.--And hereupon your brother,
your sister, and my uncle Antony, joined in, and changed the scene
entirely. In short, she says, that Mr. Solmes had great matters engaged
to him. He owned, that you were the finest young lady in England, and
he would be content to be but little beloved, if he could not, after
marriage, engage your heart, for the sake of having the honour to call
you his but for one twelvemonth--I suppose he would break your heart the
next--for he is a cruel-hearted man, I am sure.

My friends may break my heart, cousin Dolly; but Mr. Solmes will never
have it in his power to break it.

I do not know that, Miss: you will have good luck to avoid having him,
by what I can find; for my mamma says, they are all now of one mind,
herself excepted; and she is forced to be silent, your papa and brother
are both so outrageous.

I am got above minding my brother, cousin Dolly:--he is but my brother.
But to my father I owe duty and obedience, if I could comply.

We are apt to be fond of any body that will side with us, when oppressed
or provoked. I always loved my cousin Dolly; but now she endeared
herself to me ten times more, by her soothing concern for me. I asked
what she would do, were she in my case?

Without hesitation, she replied, have Mr. Lovelace out of hand, and take
up her own estate, if she were me; and there would be an end to it.--And
Mr. Lovelace, she said, was a fine gentleman:--Mr. Solmes was not worthy
to buckle his shoes.

Miss Hervey told me further, that her mother was desired to come to me,
to fetch me in; but she excused herself. I should have all my friends,
she said, she believed, sit in judgment upon me.

I wish it had been so. But, as I have been told since, neither my father
for my mother would trust themselves with seeing me: the one it seems
for passion sake; my mother for tender considerations.

By this time we entered the house. Miss accompanied me into the parlour,
and left me, as a person devoted, I then thought.

Nobody was there. I sat down, and had leisure to weep; reflecting upon
what my cousin Dolly had told me.

They were all in my sister's parlour adjoining: for I heard a confused
mixture of voices, some louder than others, which drowned the more
compassionating accents.

Female accents I could distinguish the drowned ones to be. O my dear!
what a hard-hearted sex is the other! Children of the same parents, how
came they by their cruelty?--Do they get it by travel?--Do they get
it by conversation with one another?--Or how do they get it?--Yet my
sister, too, is as hard-hearted as any of them. But this may be no
exception neither: for she has been thought to be masculine in her air
and her spirit. She has then, perhaps, a soul of the other sex in a body
of ours. And so, for the honour of our own, will I judge of every
woman for the future, who imitating the rougher manners of men, acts
unbeseeming the gentleness of her own sex.

Forgive me, my dear friend, for breaking into my story by these
reflections. Were I rapidly to pursue my narration, without thinking,
without reflecting, I believe I should hardly be able to keep in my
right mind: since vehemence and passion would then be always uppermost;
but while I think as I write, I cool, and my hurry of spirits is
allayed.

I believe I was about a quarter of an hour enjoying my own comfortless
contemplations, before any body came in to me; for they seemed to be
in full debate. My aunt looked in first; O my dear, said she, are you
there? and withdrew hastily to apprize them of it.

And then (as agreed upon I suppose) in came my uncle Antony, crediting
Mr. Solmes with the words, Let me lead you in, my dear friend, having
hold of his hand; while the new-made beau awkwardly followed, but more
edgingly, as I may say, setting his feet mincingly, to avoid treading
upon his leader's heels. Excuse me, my dear, this seeming levity; but
those we do not love, appear in every thing ungraceful to us.

I stood up. My uncle looked very surly.--Sit down!--Sit down, Girl,
said he.--And drawing a chair near me, he placed his dear friend in it,
whether he would or not, I having taken my seat. And my uncle sat on the
other side of me.

Well, Niece, taking my hand, we shall have very little more to say to
you than we have already said, as to the subject that is so distasteful
to you--unless, indeed, you have better considered of the matter--And
first let me know if you have?

The matter wants no consideration, Sir.

Very well, very well, Madam! said my uncle, withdrawing his hands from
mine: Could I ever have thought of this from you?

For God's sake, dearest Madam, said Mr. Solmes, folding his hands--And
there he stopped.

For God's sake, what, Sir?--How came God's sake, and your sake, I pray
you, to be the same?

This silenced him. My uncle could only be angry; and that he was before.

Well, well, well, Mr. Solmes, said my uncle, no more of supplication.
You have not confidence enough to expect a woman's favour.

He then was pleased to hint what great things he had designed to do for
me; and that it was more for my sake, after he returned from the Indies,
than for the sake of any other of the family, that he had resolved
to live a single life.--But now, concluded he, that the perverse girl
despises all the great things it was once as much in my will, as it is
in my power, to do for her, I will change my measures.

I told him, that I most sincerely thanked him for all his kind
intentions to me: but that I was willing to resign all claim to any
other of his favours than kind looks and kind words.

He looked about him this way and that.

Mr. Solmes looked pitifully down.

But both being silent, I was sorry, I added, that I had too much reason
to say a very harsh thing, as I might be thought; which was, That if
he would but be pleased to convince my brother and sister, that he was
absolutely determined to alter his generous purposes towards me,
it might possibly procure me better treatment from both, than I was
otherwise likely to have.

My uncle was very much displeased. But he had not the opportunity to
express his displeasure, as he seemed preparing to do; for in came my
brother in exceeding great wrath; and called me several vile names. His
success hitherto, in his device against me, had set him above keeping
even decent measures.

Was this my spiteful construction? he asked--Was this the interpretation
I put upon his brotherly care of me, and concern for me, in order to
prevent my ruining myself?

It is, indeed it is, said I: I know no other way to account for your
late behaviour to me: and before your face, I repeat my request to my
uncle, and I will make it to my other uncle whenever I am permitted to
see him, that they will confer all their favours upon you, and upon my
sister; and only make me happy (it is all I wish for!) in their kind
looks, and kind words.

How they all gazed upon one another!--But could I be less peremptory
before the man?

And, as to your care and concern for me, Sir, turning to my brother;
once more I desire it not. You are but my brother. My father and mother,
I bless God, are both living; and were they not, you have given me
abundant reason to say, that you are the very last person I would wish
to have any concern for me.

How, Niece! And is a brother, an only brother, of so little
consideration with you, as this comes to? And ought he to have no
concern for his sister's honour, and the family's honour.

My honour, Sir!--I desire none of his concern for that! It never was
endangered till it had his undesired concern!--Forgive me, Sir--but when
my brother knows how to act like a brother, or behave like a gentleman,
he may deserve more consideration from me than it is possible for me now
to think he does.

I thought my brother would have beat me upon this: but my uncle stood
between us.

Violent girl, however, he called me--Who, said he, who would have
thought it of her?

Then was Mr. Solmes told, that I was unworthy of his pursuit.

But Mr. Solmes warmly took my part: he could not bear, he said, that I
should be treated so roughly.

And so very much did he exert himself on this occasion, and so patiently
was his warmth received by my brother, that I began to suspect, that it
was a contrivance to make me think myself obliged to him; and that this
might perhaps be one end of the pressed-for interview.

The very suspicion of this low artifice, violent as I was thought to be
before, put me still more out of patience; and my uncle and my brother
again praising his wonderful generosity, and his noble return of good
for evil, You are a happy man, Mr. Solmes, said I, that you can
so easily confer obligations upon a whole family, except upon one
ungrateful person of it, whom you seem to intend most to oblige; but
who being made unhappy by your favour, desires not to owe to you any
protection from the violence of a brother.

Then was I a rude, an ungrateful, and unworthy creature.

I own it all--all, all you can call me, or think me, Brother, do I own.
I own my unworthiness with regard to this gentleman. I take your word
for his abundant merit, which I have neither leisure nor inclination to
examine into--it may perhaps be as great as your own--but yet I cannot
thank him for his great mediation: For who sees not, looking at my
uncle, that this is giving himself a merit with every body at my
expense?

Then turning to my brother, who seemed surprised into silence by my
warmth, I must also acknowledge, Sir, the favour of your superabundant
care for me. But I discharge you of it; at least, while I have the
happiness of nearer and dearer relations. You have given me no reason to
think better of your prudence, than of my own. I am independent of you,
Sir, though I never desire to be so of my father: and although I wish
for the good opinion of my uncles, it is all I wish for from them: and
this, Sir, I repeat, to make you and my sister easy.

Instantly almost came in Betty, in a great hurry, looking at me as
spitefully as if she were my sister: Sir, said she to my brother, my
master desires to speak with you this moment at the door.

He went to that which led into my sister's parlour; and this sentence
I heard thundered from the mouth of one who had a right to all my
reverence: Son James, let the rebel be this moment carried away to my
brother's--this very moment--she shall not stay one hour more under my
roof!

I trembled; I was ready to sink. Yet, not knowing what I did, or said, I
flew to the door, and would have opened it: but my brother pulled it to,
and held it close by the key--O my Papa!--my dear Papa! said I, falling
upon my knees, at the door--admit your child to your presence!--Let me
but plead my cause at your feet!--Oh! reprobate not thus your distressed
daughter!

My uncle put his handkerchief to his eyes. Mr. Solmes made a still more
grievous face than he had before. But my brother's marble heart was
untouched.

I will not stir from my knees, continued I, without admission; at this
door I beg it!--Oh! let it be the door of mercy! and open it to me,
honoured Sir, I beseech you!--But this once, this once! although you
were afterwards to shut it against me for ever!

The door was endeavoured to be opened on the inside, which made my
brother let go the key on a sudden; and I pressing against it, (all
the time remaining on my knees,) fell flat on my face into the other
parlour; however without hurting myself. But every body was gone, except
Betty, who I suppose was the person that endeavoured to open the door.
She helped to raise me up; and when I was on my feet, I looked round
that apartment, and seeing nobody there, re-entered the other, leaning
upon her; and then threw myself into the chair which I had sat in
before; and my eyes overflowed, to my great relief: while my uncle
Antony, my brother, and Mr. Solmes, left me, and went to my other
relations.

What passed among them, I know not: but my brother came in by the time
I had tolerably recovered myself, with a settled and haughty gloom upon
his brow--Your father and mother command you instantly to prepare for
your uncle Antony's. You need not be solicitous about what you shall
take with you: you may give Betty your keys--Take them, Betty, if the
perverse one has them about her, and carry them to her mother. She will
take care to send every thing after you that you shall want--but another
night you will not be permitted to stay in this house.

I don't choose to give my keys to any body, except to my mother, and
into her own hands.--You see how much I am disordered. It may cost me
my life, to be hurried away so suddenly. I beg to be indulged till next
Monday at least.

That will not be granted you. So prepare for this very very night.
And give up your keys. Give them to me, Miss. I'll carry them to your
mother.

Excuse me, Brother. Indeed I won't.

Indeed you must. Have you any thing you are afraid should be seen by
your mother?

Not if I be permitted to attend her.

I'll make a report accordingly.

He went out.

In came Miss Dolly Hervey: I am sorry, Madam, to be the messenger--but
your mamma insists upon your sending up all the keys of your cabinet,
library, and drawers.

Tell my mother, that I yield them up to her commands: tell her, I
make no conditions with my mother: but if she finds nothing she shall
disapprove of, I beg that she will permit me to tarry here a few days
longer.--Try, my Dolly, [the dear girl sobbing with grief;] try if your
gentleness cannot prevail for me.

She wept still more, and said, It is sad, very sad, to see matters thus
carried!

She took the keys, and wrapped her arms about me; and begged me to
excuse her for her message; and would have said more; but Betty's
presence awed her, as I saw.

Don't pity me, my dear, said I. It will be imputed to you as a fault.
You see who is by.

The insolent wench scornfully smiled: One young lady pitying another
in things of this nature, looks promising in the youngest, I must needs
say.

I bid her begone from my presence.

She would most gladly go, she said, were she not to stay about me by my
mother's order.

It soon appeared for what she staid; for I offering to go up stairs to
my apartment when my cousin went from me with the keys, she told me she
was commanded (to her very great regret, she must own) to desire me not
to go up at present.

Such a bold face, as she, I told her, should not hinder me.

She instantly rang the bell, and in came my brother, meeting me at the
door.

Return, return, Miss--no going up yet.

I went in again, and throwing myself upon the window-seat, wept
bitterly.

Shall I give you the particulars of a ridiculously-spiteful conversation
that passed between my brother and me, in the time that he (with
Betty) was in office to keep me in the parlour while my closet was
searching!--But I think I will not. It can answer no good end.

I desired several times, while he staid, to have leave to retire to my
apartment; but was denied. The search, I suppose, was not over.

Bella was one of those employed in it. They could not have a more
diligent searcher. How happy it was they were disappointed!

But when my sister could not find the cunning creature's papers, I was
to stand another visit from Mr. Solmes--preceded now by my aunt Hervey,
solely against her will, I could see that; accompanied by my uncle
Antony, in order to keep her steady, I suppose.

But being a little heavy (for it is now past two in the morning) I
will lie down in my clothes, to indulge the kind summons, if it will be
indulged.


THREE O'CLOCK, WEDNESDAY MORNING.

I could not sleep--Only dozed away one half-hour.

My aunt Hervey accosted me thus:--O my dear child, what troubles do you
give to your parents, and to every body!--I wonder at you!

I am sorry for it, Madam.

Sorry for it, child!--Why then so very obstinate?--Come, sit down, my
dear. I will sit next to you; taking my hand.

My uncle placed Mr. Solmes on the other side of me: himself over-against
me, almost close to me. Was I not finely beset, my dear?

Your brother, child, said my aunt, is too passionate--his zeal for your
welfare pushes him on a little too vehemently.

Very true, said my uncle: but no more of this. We would now be glad to
see if milder means will do with you--though, indeed, they were tried
before.

I asked my aunt, If it were necessary, that the gentleman should be
present?

There is a reason that he should, said my aunt, as you will hear by-and
by.--But I must tell you, first, that, thinking you was a little too
angrily treated by your brother, your mother desired me to try what
gentler means would do upon a spirit so generous as we used to think
yours.

Nothing can be done, Madam, I must presume to say, if this gentleman's
address be the end.

She looked upon my uncle, who bit his lip; and looked upon Mr. Solmes,
who rubbed his cheek; and shaking her head, Good, dear creature, said
she, be calm. Let me ask you, If something would have been done, had you
been more gently used, than you seem to think you have been?

No, Madam, I cannot say it would, in this gentleman's favour. You
know, Madam, you know, Sir, to my uncle, I ever valued myself upon my
sincerity: and once indeed had the happiness to be valued for it.

My uncle took Mr. Solmes aside. I heard him say, whispering, She must,
she shall, still be yours.--We'll see, who'll conquer, parents or child,
uncles or niece. I doubt not to be witness to all this being got over,
and many a good-humoured jest made of this high phrensy!

I was heartily vexed.

Though we cannot find out, continued he, yet we guess, who puts her upon
this obstinate behaviour. It is not natural to her, man. Nor would I
concern myself so much about her, but that I know what I say to be true,
and intend to do great things for her.

I will hourly pray for that happy time, whispered as audibly Mr. Solmes.
I never will revive the remembrance of what is now so painful to me.

Well, but, Niece, I am to tell you, said my aunt, that the sending up
of the keys, without making any conditions, has wrought for you what
nothing else could have done. That, and the not finding any thing that
could give them umbrage, together with Mr. Solmes's interposition--

O Madam, let me not owe an obligation to Mr. Solmes. I cannot repay it,
except by my thanks; and those only on condition that he will decline
his suit. To my thanks, Sir, [turning to him,] if you have a heart
capable of humanity, if you have any esteem for me for my own sake, I
beseech you to entitle yourself!--I beseech you, do--!

O Madam, cried he, believe, believe, believe me, it is impossible. While
you are single, I will hope. While that hope is encouraged by so many
worthy friends, I must persevere. I must not slight them, Madam, because
you slight me.

I answered him only with a look; but it was of high disdain; and turning
from him,--But what favour, dear Madam, [to my aunt,] has the instance
of duty you mention procured me?

Your mother and Mr. Solmes, replied my aunt, have prevailed, that your
request to stay here till Monday next shall be granted, if you will
promise to go cheerfully then.

Let me but choose my own visiters, and I will go to my uncle's house
with pleasure.

Well, Niece, said my aunt, we must wave this subject, I find. We will
now proceed to another, which will require your utmost attention. It
will give you the reason why Mr. Solmes's presence is requisite--

Ay, said my uncle, and shew you what sort of a man somebody is. Mr.
Solmes, pray favour us, in the first place, with the letter you received
from your anonymous friend.

I will, Sir. And out he pulled a letter-case, and taking out a letter,
it is written in answer to one, sent to the person. It is superscribed,
To Roger Solmes, Esq. It begins thus: Honoured Sir--

I beg your pardon, Sir, said I: but what, pray, is the intent of reading
this letter to me?

To let you know what a vile man you are thought to have set your heart
upon, said my uncle, in an audible whisper.

If, Sir, it be suspected, that I have set my heart upon any other, why
is Mr. Solmes to give himself any further trouble about me?

Only hear, Niece, said my aunt; only hear what Mr. Solmes has to read
and to say to you on this head.

If, Madam, Mr. Solmes will be pleased to declare, that he has no view
to serve, no end to promote, for himself, I will hear any thing he shall
read. But if the contrary, you must allow me to say, that it will abate
with me a great deal of the weight of whatever he shall produce.

Hear it but read, Niece, said my aunt--

Hear it read, said my uncle. You are so ready to take part with--

With any body, Sir, that is accused anonymously, and from interested
motives.

He began to read; and there seemed to be a heavy load of charges in this
letter against the poor criminal: but I stopped the reading of it,
and said, It will not be my fault, if this vilified man be not as
indifferent to me, as one whom I never saw. If he be otherwise at
present, which I neither own, nor deny, it proceed from the strange
methods taken to prevent it. Do not let one cause unite him and me, and
we shall not be united. If my offer to live single be accepted, he shall
be no more to me than this gentleman.

Still--Proceed, Mr. Solmes--Hear it out, Niece, was my uncle's cry.

But to what purpose, Sir! said I--Had not Mr. Solmes a view in this?
And, besides, can any thing worse be said of Mr. Lovelace, than I have
heard said for several months past?

But this, said my uncle, and what Mr. Solmes can tell you besides,
amounts to the fullest proof--

Was the unhappy man, then, so freely treated in his character before,
without full proof? I beseech you, Sir, give me not too good an opinion
of Mr. Lovelace; as I may have, if such pains be taken to make him
guilty, by one who means not his reformation by it; nor to do good, if I
may presume to say so in this case, to any body but himself.

I see very plainly, girl, said my uncle, your prepossession, your fond
prepossession, for the person of a man without morals.

Indeed, my dear, said my aunt, you too much justify all your
apprehension. Surprising! that a young creature of virtue and honour
should thus esteem a man of a quite opposite character!

Dear Madam, do not conclude against me too hastily. I believe Mr.
Lovelace is far from being so good as he ought to be: but if every man's
private life was searched into by prejudiced people, set on for that
purpose, I know not whose reputation would be safe. I love a virtuous
character, as much in man as in woman. I think it is requisite, and as
meritorious, in the one as in the other. And, if left to myself, I would
prefer a person of such a character to royalty without it.

Why then, said my uncle--

Give me leave, Sir--but I may venture to say, that many of those who
have escaped censure, have not merited applause.

Permit me to observe further, That Mr. Solmes himself may not be
absolutely faultless. I never head of his virtues. Some vices I have
heard of--Excuse me, Mr. Solmes, I speak to your face--The text about
casting the first stone affords an excellent lesson.

He looked down; but was silent.

Mr. Lovelace may have vices you have not. You may have others, which
he has not. I speak not this to defend him, or to accuse you. No man is
bad, no one is good, in every thing. Mr. Lovelace, for example, is said
to be implacable, and to hate my friends: that does not make me value
him the more: but give me leave to say, that they hate him as much. Mr.
Solmes has his antipathies, likewise; very strong ones, and those to his
own relations; which I don't find to be the other's fault; for he lives
well with his--yet he may have as bad:--worse, pardon me, he cannot
have, in my poor opinion: for what must be the man, who hates his own
flesh?

You know not, Madam; You know not, Niece; all in one breath. You know
not, Clary;

I may not, nor do I desire to know Mr. Solmes's reasons. It concerns not
me to know them: but the world, even the impartial part of it, accuses
him. If the world is unjust or rash, in one man's case, why may it not
be so in another's? That's all I mean by it. Nor can there by a greater
sign of want of merit, than where a man seeks to pull down another's
character, in order to build up his own.

The poor man's face was all this time overspread with confusion,
twisted, as it were, and all awry, neither mouth nor nose standing in
the middle of it. He looked as if he were ready to cry: and had he been
capable of pitying me, I had certainly tried to pity him.

They all three gazed upon one another in silence.

My aunt, I saw (at least I thought so) looked as if she would have been
glad she might have appeared to approve of what I said. She but feebly
blamed me, when she spoke, for not hearing what Mr. Solmes had to say.
He himself seemed not now very earnest to be heard. My uncle said,
There was no talking to me. And I should have absolutely silenced both
gentlemen, had not my brother come in again to their assistance.

This was the strange speech he made at his entrance, his eyes flaming
with anger; This prating girl, has struck you all dumb, I perceive.
Persevere, however, Mr. Solmes. I have heard every word she has said:
and I know of no other method of being even with her, than after she is
yours, to make her as sensible of your power, as she now makes you of
her insolence.

Fie, cousin Harlowe! said my aunt--Could I have thought a brother would
have said this, to a gentleman, of a sister?

I must tell you, Madam, said he, that you give the rebel courage.
You yourself seem to favour too much the arrogance of her sex in
her; otherwise she durst not have thus stopped her uncle's mouth by
reflections upon him; as well as denied to hear a gentleman tell her
the danger she is in from a libertine, whose protection, as she plainly
hinted, she intends to claim against her family.

Stopped my uncle's mouth, by reflections upon him, Sir! said I, how can
that be! how dare you to make such an application as this!

My aunt wept at his reflection upon her.--Cousin, said she to him, if
this be the thanks I have for my trouble, I have done: your father
would not treat me thus--and I will say, that the hint you gave was an
unbrotherly one.

Not more unbrotherly than all the rest of his conduct to me, of late,
Madam, said I. I see by this specimen of his violence, how every body
has been brought into his measures. Had I any the least apprehension of
ever being in Mr. Solmes's power, this might have affected me. But you
see, Sir, to Mr. Solmes, what a conduct is thought necessary to enable
you to arrive at your ungenerous end. You see how my brother courts for
you.

I disclaim Mr. Harlowe's violence, Madam, with all my soul. I will never
remind you--

Silence, worthy Sir, said I; I will take care you never shall have the
opportunity.

Less violence, Clary, said my uncle. Cousin James, you are as much to
blame as your sister.

In then came my sister. Brother, said she, you kept not your promise.
You are thought to be to blame within, as well as here. Were not Mr.
Solmes's generosity and affection to the girl well known, what you said
would have been inexcusable. My father desires to speak with you; and
with you, Mr. Solmes, if you please.

They all four withdrew into the next apartment.

I stood silent, as not knowing presently how to take this intervention
of my sister's. But she left me not long at a loss--O thou perverse
thing, said she [poking out her angry face at me, when they were all
gone, but speaking spitefully low]--what trouble do you give to us all!

You and my brother, Bella, said I, give trouble to yourselves; yet
neither you nor he have any business to concern yourselves about me.

She threw out some spiteful expressions, still in a low voice, as if she
chose not to be heard without; and I thought it best to oblige her to
raise her tone a little, if I could. If I could, did I say? It is easy
to make a passionate spirit answer all one's views upon it.

She accordingly flamed out in a raised tone: and this brought my cousin
Dolly in to us. Miss Harlowe, your company is desired.

I will come presently, cousin Dolly.

But again provoking a severity from me which she could not bear, and
calling me names! in once more come Dolly, with another message, that
her company was desired.

Not mine, I doubt, Miss Dolly, said I.

The sweet-tempered girl burst out into tears, and shook her head.

Go in before me, child, said Bella, [vexed to see her concern for me,]
with thy sharp face like a new moon: What dost thou cry for? is it to
make thy keen face look still keener?

I believe Bella was blamed, too, when she went in; for I heard her say,
the creature was so provoking, there was no keeping a resolution.

Mr. Solmes, after a little while, came in again by himself, to take
leave of me: full of scrapes and compliments; but too well tutored and
encouraged, to give me hope of his declining his suit. He begged me
not to impute to him any of the severe things to which he had been a
sorrowful witness. He besought my compassion, as he called it.

He said, the result was, that he still had hopes given him; and,
although discouraged by me, he was resolved to persevere, while I
remained single.--And such long and such painful services he talked of,
as never before were heard of.

I told him in the strongest manner, what he had to trust to.

Yet still he determined to persist.--While I was no man's else, he must
hope.

What! said I, will you still persist, when I declare, as I do now, that
my affections are engaged?--And let my brother make the most of it.

He knew my principles, and adored me for them. He doubted not, that it
was in his power to make me happy: and he was sure I would not want the
will to be so.

I assured him, that were I to be carried to my uncle's, it should answer
no end; for I would never see him; nor receive a line from him; nor hear
a word in his favour, whoever were the person who should mention him to
me.

He was sorry for it. He must be miserable, were I to hold in that mind.
But he doubted not, that I might be induced by my father and uncles to
change it--

Never, never, he might depend upon it.

It was richly worth his patience, and the trial.

At my expense?--At the price of all my happiness, Sir?

He hoped I should be induced to think otherwise.

And then would he have run into his fortune, his settlements, his
affection--vowing, that never man loved a woman with so sincere a
passion as he loved me.

I stopped him, as to the first part of his speech: and to the second,
of the sincerity of his passion, What then, Sir, said I, is your love to
one, who must assure you, that never young creature looked upon man with
a more sincere disapprobation, than I look upon you? And tell me,
what argument can you urge, that this true declaration answers not
before-hand?

Dearest Madam, what can I say?--On my knees I beg--

And down the ungraceful wretch dropped on his knees.

Let me not kneel in vain, Madam: let me not be thus despised.--And he
looked most odiously sorrowful.

I have kneeled too, Mr. Solmes: often have I kneeled: and I will kneel
again--even to you, Sir, will I kneel, if there be so much merit in
kneeling; provided you will not be the implement of my cruel brother's
undeserved persecution.

If all the services, even to worship you, during my whole life--You,
Madam, invoke and expect mercy; yet shew none--

Am I to be cruel to myself, to shew mercy to you; take my estate, Sir,
with all my heart, since you are such a favourite in this house!--only
leave me myself--the mercy you ask for, do you shew to others.

If you mean to my relations, Madam--unworthy as they are, all shall be
done that you shall prescribe.

Who, I, Sir, to find you bowels you naturally have not? I to purchase
their happiness by the forfeiture of my own? What I ask you for,
is mercy to myself: that, since you seem to have some power over my
relations, you will use it in my behalf. Tell them, that you see I
cannot conquer my aversion to you: tell them, if you are a wise man,
that you too much value your own happiness, to risk it against such a
determined antipathy: tell them that I am unworthy of your offers: and
that in mercy to yourself, as well as to me, you will not prosecute a
suit so impossible to be granted.

I will risque all consequences, said the fell wretch, rising, with a
countenance whitened over, as if with malice, his hollow eyes flashing
fire, and biting his under lip, to shew he could be manly. Your hatred,
Madam, shall be no objection with me: and I doubt not in a few days to
have it in my power to shew you--

You have it in your power, Sir--

He came well off--To shew you more generosity than, noble as you are
said to be to others, you shew to me.

The man's face became his anger: it seems formed to express the passion.

At that instant, again in came my brother--Sister, Sister, Sister, said
he, with his teeth set, act on the termagant part you have so newly
assumed--most wonderfully well does it become you. It is but a
short one, however. Tyraness in your turn, accuse others of your own
guilt--But leave her, leaver her, Mr. Solmes: her time is short. You'll
find her humble and mortified enough very quickly. Then, how like a
little tame fool will she look, with her conscience upbraiding her, and
begging of you [with a whining voice, the barbarous brother spoke] to
forgive and forget!

More he said, as he flew out, with a glowing face, upon Shorey's coming
in to recall him on his violence.

I removed from chair to chair, excessively frighted and disturbed at
this brutal treatment.

The man attempted to excuse himself, as being sorry for my brother's
passion.

Leave me, leave me, Sir, fanning--or I shall faint. And indeed I thought
I should.

He recommended himself to my favour with an air of assurance; augmented,
as I thought, by a distress so visible in me; for he even snatched my
trembling, my struggling hand; and ravished it to his odious mouth.

I flung from him with high disdain: and he withdrew, bowing and
cringing; self-gratified, and enjoying, as I thought, the confusion he
saw me in.

The wretch is now, methinks, before me; and now I see him awkwardly
striding backward, as he retired, till the edge of the opened door,
which he ran against, remembered him to turn his welcome back upon me.

Upon his withdrawing, Betty brought me word, that I was permitted to
go up to my own chamber: and was bid to consider of every thing: for my
time was short. Nevertheless, she believed I might be permitted to stay
till Saturday.

She tells me, that although my brother and sister were blamed for being
so hasty with me, yet when they made their report, and my uncle Antony
his, of my provocations, they were all more determined than ever in Mr.
Solmes's favour.

The wretch himself, she tells me, pretends to be more in love with
me than before; and to be rather delighted than discouraged with the
conversation that passed between us. He ran on, she says, in raptures,
about the grace wherewith I should dignify his board; and the like sort
of stuff, either of his saying, or of her making.

She closed all with a Now is your time, Miss, to submit with a grace,
and to make your own terms with him:--else, I can tell you, were I Mr.
Solmes, it should be worse for you: And who, Miss, of our sex, proceeded
the saucy creature, would admire a rakish gentleman, when she might be
admired by a sober one to the end of the chapter?

She made this further speech to me on quitting my chamber--You have
had amazing good luck, Miss. I must tell you, to keep your writings
concealed so cunningly. You must needs think I know that you are always
at your pen: and as you endeavour to hide that knowledge from me, I
do not think myself obliged to keep your secret. But I love not to
aggravate. I had rather reconcile by much. Peace-making is my talent,
and ever was. And had I been as much your foe, as you imagine, you had
not perhaps been here now. But this, however, I do not say to make a
merit with you, Miss: for, truly, it will be the better for you the
sooner every thing is over with you. And better for me, and for every
one else; that's certain. Yet one hint I must conclude with; that your
pen and ink (soon as you are to go away) will not be long in your power,
I do assure you, Miss. And then, having lost that amusement, it will be
seen, how a mind so active as yours will be able to employ itself.

This hint alarms me so much, that I shall instantly begin to conceal, in
different places, pens, inks, and paper; and to deposit some in the ivy
summer-house, if I can find a safe place there; and, at the worst, I
have got a pencil of black, and another of red lead, which I use in my
drawings; and my patterns shall serve for paper, if I have no other.

How lucky it was, that I had got away my papers! They made a strict
search for them; that I can see, by the disorderly manner they have left
all things in: for you know that I am such an observer of method, that
I can go to a bit of ribband, or lace, or edging, blindfold. The same in
my books; which they have strangely disordered and mismatched; to look
behind them, and in some of them, I suppose. My clothes too are rumpled
not a little. No place has escaped them. To your hint, I thank you, are
they indebted for their disappointment.

The pen, through heaviness and fatigue, dropt out of my fingers, at the
word indebted. I resumed it, to finish the sentence; and to tell you,
that I am,

Your for ever obliged and affectionate CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XXXV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK, APRIL 5.


I must write as I have opportunity; making use of my concealed stores:
for my pens and ink (all of each that they could find) are taken from
me; as I shall tell you about more particularly by and by.

About an hour ago, I deposited my long letter to you; as also, in the
usual place, a billet to Mr. Lovelace, lest his impatience should put
him upon some rashness; signifying, in four lines, 'That the interview
was over; and that I hoped my steady refusal of Mr. Solmes would
discourage any further applications to me in his favour.'

Although I was unable (through the fatigue I had undergone, and by
reason of sitting up all night, to write to you, which made me lie
longer than ordinary this morning) to deposit my letter to you sooner,
yet I hope you will have it in such good time, as that you will be able
to send me an answer to it this night, or in the morning early; which,
if ever so short, will inform me, whether I may depend upon your
mother's indulgence or not. This it behoves me to know as soon as
possible; for they are resolved to hurry me away on Saturday next at
farthest; perhaps to-morrow.

I will now inform you of all that has happened previous to their taking
away my pen and ink, as well as of the manner in which that act of
violence was committed; and this as briefly as I can.

My aunt, who (as well as Mr. Solmes, and my two uncles) lives here, I
think, came up to me, and said, she would fain have me hear what Mr.
Solmes had to say of Mr. Lovelace--only that I may be apprized of
some things, that would convince me what a vile man he is, and what a
wretched husband he must make. I might give them what degree of credit
I pleased; and take them with abatement for Mr. Solmes's interestedness,
if I thought fit. But it might be of use to me, were it but to question
Mr. Lovelace indirectly upon some of them, that related to myself.

I was indifferent, I said, about what he could say of me; and I was sure
it could not be to my disadvantage; and as he had no reason to impute to
me the forwardness which my unkind friends had so causelessly taxed me
with.

She said, That he gave himself high airs on account of his family; and
spoke as despicably of ours as if an alliance with us were beneath him.

I replied, That he was a very unworthy man, if it were true, to speak
slightingly of a family, which was as good as his own, 'bating that
it was not allied to the peerage: that the dignity itself, I thought,
conveyed more shame than honour to descendants, who had not merit to
adorn, as well as to be adorned by it: that my brother's absurd pride,
indeed, which made him every where declare, he would never marry but to
quality, gave a disgraceful preference against ours: but that were I
to be assured, that Mr. Lovelace was capable of so mean a pride as to
insult us or value himself on such an accidental advantage, I should
think as despicably of his sense, as every body else did of his morals.

She insisted upon it, that he had taken such liberties, it would be but
common justice (so much hated as he was by all our family, and so
much inveighed against in all companies by them) to inquire into the
provocation he had to say what was imputed to him; and whether the value
some of my friends put upon the riches they possess (throwing perhaps
contempt upon every other advantage, and even discrediting their own
pretensions to family, in order to depreciate his) might not provoke him
to like contempts. Upon the whole, Madam, said I, can you say, that the
inveteracy lies not as much on our side, as on his? Can he say any thing
of us more disrespectful than we say of him?--And as to the suggestion,
so often repeated, that he will make a bad husband, Is it possible for
him to use a wife worse than I am used; particularly by my brother and
sister?

Ah, Niece! Ah, my dear! how firmly has this wicked man attached you!

Perhaps not, Madam. But really great care should be taken by fathers and
mothers, when they would have their daughters of their minds in these
particulars, not to say things that shall necessitate the child, in
honour and generosity, to take part with the man her friends are averse
to. But, waving all this, as I have offered to renounce him for ever, I
see now why he should be mentioned to me, nor why I should be wished to
hear any thing about him.

Well, but still, my dear, there can be no harm to let Mr. Solmes tell
you what Mr. Lovelace has said of you. Severely as you have treated Mr.
Solmes, he is fond of attending you once more: he begs to be heard on
this head.

If it be proper for me to hear it, Madam--

It is, eagerly interrupted she, very proper.

Has what he has said of me, Madam, convinced you of Mr. Lovelace's
baseness?

It has, my dear: and that you ought to abhor him for it.

Then, dear Madam, be pleased to let me hear it from your mouth: there
is no need that I should see Mr. Solmes, when it will have double the
weight from you. What, Madam, has the man dared to say of me?

My aunt was quite at a loss.

At last, Well, said she, I see how you are attached. I am sorry for it,
Miss. For I do assure you, it will signify nothing. You must be Mrs.
Solmes; and that in a very few days.

If consent of heart, and assent of voice, be necessary to a marriage, I
am sure I never can, nor ever will, be married to Mr. Solmes. And what
will any of my relations be answerable for, if they force my hand into
his, and hold it there till the service be read; I perhaps insensible,
and in fits, all the time!

What a romantic picture of a forced marriage have you drawn, Niece!
Some people would say, you have given a fine description of your own
obstinacy, child.

My brother and sister would: but you, Madam, distinguish, I am sure,
between obstinacy and aversion.

Supposed aversion may owe its rise to real obstinacy, my dear.

I know my own heart, Madam. I wish you did.

Well, but see Mr. Solmes once more, Niece. It will oblige and make for
you more than you imagine.

What should I see him for, Madam?--Is the man fond of hearing me declare
my aversion to him?--Is he desirous of having me more and more incense
my friends against myself?--O my cunning, my ambitious brother!

Ah, my dear! with a look of pity, as if she understood the meaning of my
exclamation--But must that necessarily be the case?

It must, Madam, if they will take offence at me for declaring my
steadfast detestation of Mr. Solmes, as a husband.

Mr. Solmes is to be pitied, said she. He adores you. He longs to see
you once more. He loves you the better for your cruel usage of him
yesterday. He is in raptures about you.

Ugly creature, thought I!--He in raptures!

What a cruel wretch must he be, said I, who can enjoy the distress to
which he so largely contributes!--But I see, I see, Madam, that I am
considered as an animal to be baited, to make sport for my brother
and sister, and Mr. Solmes. They are all, all of them, wanton in their
cruelty.--I, Madam, see the man! the man so incapable of pity!--Indeed I
will not see him, if I can help it--indeed I will not.

What a construction does your lively wit put upon the admiration
Mr. Solmes expresses of you!--Passionate as you were yesterday, and
contemptuously as you treated him, he dotes upon you for the very
severity by which he suffers. He is not so ungenerous a man as you think
him: nor has he an unfeeling heart.--Let me prevail upon you, my dear,
(as your father and mother expect it of you,) to see him once more, and
hear what he has to say to you.

How can I consent to see him again, when yesterday's interview
was interpreted by you, Madam, as well as by every other, as an
encouragement to him? when I myself declared, that if I saw him a second
time by my own consent, it might be so taken? and when I am determined
never to encourage him?

You might spare your reflections upon me, Miss. I have no thanks either
from one side or the other.

And away she flung.

Dearest Madam! said I, following her to the door--

But she would not hear me further; and her sudden breaking from me
occasioned a hurry to some mean listener; as the slipping of a foot from
the landing-place on the stairs discovered to me.

I had scarcely recovered myself from this attack, when up came
Betty--Miss, said she, your company is desired below-stairs in your own
parlour.

By whom, Betty?

How can I tell, Miss?--perhaps by your sister, perhaps by your
brother--I know they wont' come up stairs to your apartment again.

Is Mr. Solmes gone, Betty?

I believe he is, Miss--Would you have him sent for back? said the bold
creature.

Down I went: and to whom should I be sent for, but to my brother and Mr.
Solmes! the latter standing sneaking behind the door, so that I saw him
not, till I was mockingly led by the hand into the room by my brother.
And then I started as if I had beheld a ghost.

You are to sit down, Clary.

And what then, Brother?

Why then, you are to put off that scornful look, and hear what Mr.
Solmes has to say to you.

Sent down for to be baited again, thought I!

Madam, said Mr. Solmes, as if in haste to speak, lest he should not have
an opportunity given him, [and indeed he judged right,] Mr. Lovelace is
a declared marriage hater, and has a design upon your honour, if ever--

Base accuser! said I, in a passion, snatching my hand from my brother,
who was insolently motioning to give it to Mr. Solmes; he has not!--he
dares not!--But you have, if endeavouring to force a free mind be to
dishonour it!

O thou violent creature! said my brother--but not gone yet--for I was
rushing away.

What mean you, Sir, [struggling vehemently to get away,] to detain me
thus against my will?

You shall not go, Violence; clasping his unbrotherly arms about me.

Then let not Mr. Solmes stay.--Why hold you me thus? he shall not for
your own sake, if I can help it, see how barbarously a brother can treat
a sister who deserves not evil treatment.

And I struggled so vehemently to get from him, that he was forced to
quit my hand; which he did with these words--Begone then, Fury!--how
strong is will!--there is no holding her.

And up I flew to my chamber, and locked myself in, trembling and out of
breath.

In less than a quarter of an hour, up came Betty. I let her in upon her
tapping, and asking (half out of breath too) for admittance.

The Lord have mercy upon us! said she.--What a confusion of a house is
this! [hurrying up and down, fanning herself with her handkerchief,]
Such angry masters and mistresses!--such an obstinate young lady!--such
a humble lover!--such enraged uncles!--such--O dear!--dear! what a
topsy-turvy house is this!--And all for what, trow?--only because a
young lady may be happy, and will not?--only because a young lady will
have a husband, and will not have a husband? What hurlyburlies are here,
where all used to be peace and quietness!

Thus she ran on to herself; while I sat as patiently as I could (being
assured that her errand was not designed to be a welcome one to me) to
observe when her soliloquy would end.

At last, turning to me--I must do as I am bid. I can't help it--don't
be angry with me, Miss. But I must carry down your pen and ink: and that
this moment.

By whose order?

By your papa's and mamma's.

How shall I know that?

She offered to go to my closet: I stept in before her: touch it, if you
dare.

Up came my cousin Dolly--Madam!--Madam! said the poor weeping,
good natured creature, in broken sentences--you must--indeed you
must--deliver to Betty--or to me--your pen and ink.

Must I, my sweet Cousin? then I will to you; but not to this bold body.
And so I gave my standish to her.

I am sorry, very sorry, said she, Miss, to be the messenger: but your
papa will not have you in the same house with him: he is resolved you
shall be carried away to-morrow, or Saturday at farthest. And therefore
your pen and ink are taken away, that you may give nobody notice of it.

And away went the dear girl, very sorrowful, carrying down with her my
standish, and all its furniture, and a little parcel of pens beside,
which having been seen when the great search was made, she was bid to
ask for.

As it happened, I had not diminished it, having hid half a dozen crow
quills in as many different places. It was lucky; for I doubt not they
had numbered how many were in the parcel.

Betty ran on, telling me, that my mother was now as much incensed
against me as any body--that my doom was fixed--that my violent
behaviour had not left one to plead for me--that Mr. Solmes bit his lip,
and muttered, and seemed to have more in his head, than could come out
at his mouth; that was her phrase.

And yet she also hinted to me, that the cruel wretch took pleasure
in seeing me; although so much to my disgust--and so wanted to see me
again.--Must he not be a savage, my dear?

The wench went on--that my uncle Harlowe said, That now he gave me
up--that he pitied Mr. Solmes--yet hoped he would not think of this
to my detriment hereafter: that my uncle Antony was of opinion, that
I ought to smart for it: and, for her part--and then, as one of the
family, she gave her opinion of the same side.

As I have no other way of hearing any thing that is said or intended
below, I bear sometimes more patiently than I otherwise should do with
her impertinence. And indeed she seems to be in all my brother's and
sister's counsels.

Miss Hervey came up again, and demanded an half-pint ink-bottle which
they had seen in my closet.

I gave it her without hesitation.

If they have no suspicion of my being able to write, they will perhaps
let me stay longer than otherwise they would.

This, my dear, is now my situation.

All my dependence, all my hopes, are in your mother's favour. But for
that, I know not what I might do: For who can tell what will come next?




LETTER XXXVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE WEDNESDAY, FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE
AFTERNOON


I am just returned from depositing the letter I so lately finished, and
such of Mr. Lovelace's letters as I had not sent you. My long letter I
found remaining there--so you will have both together.

I am convinced, methinks, it is not with you.--But your servant cannot
always be at leisure. However, I will deposit as fast as I write. I must
keep nothing by me now; and when I write, lock myself in, that I may not
be surprised now they think I have no pen and ink.

I found in the usual place another letter from this diligent man: and,
by its contents, a confirmation that nothing passes in this house but
he knows it; and that almost as soon as it passes. For this letter
must have been written before he could have received my billet; and
deposited, I suppose, when that was taken away; yet he compliments me in
it upon asserting myself (as he calls it) on that occasion to my uncle
and to Mr. Solmes.

'He assures me, however, that they are more and more determined to
subdue me.

'He sends me the compliments of his family; and acquaints me with their
earnest desire to see me amongst them. Most vehemently does he press for
my quitting this house, while it is in my power to get away: and again
craves leave to order his uncle's chariot-and-six to attend my commands
at the stile leading to the coppice adjoining to the paddock.

'Settlements to my own will he again offers. Lord M. and Lady Sarah and
Lady Betty to be guarantees of his honour and justice. But, if I choose
not to go to either of those ladies, nor yet to make him the happiest of
men so soon as it is nevertheless his hope that I will, he urges me to
withdraw to my own house, and to accept of Lord M. for my guardian and
protector till my cousin Morden arrives. He can contrive, he says,
to give me easy possession of it, and will fill it with his female
relations on the first invitation from me; and Mrs. Norton, or Miss
Howe, may be undoubtedly prevailed upon to be with me for a time. There
can be no pretence for litigation, he says, when I am once in it. Nor,
if I choose to have it so, will he appear to visit me; nor presume to
mention marriage to me till all is quiet and easy; till every method I
shall prescribe for a reconciliation with my friends is tried; till my
cousin comes; till such settlements are drawn as he shall approve of for
me; and that I have unexceptionable proofs of his own good behaviour.'

As to the disgrace a person of my character may be apprehensive of upon
quitting my father's house, he observes (too truly I doubt) 'That the
treatment I meet with is in every one's mouth: yet, he says, that the
public voice is in my favour. My friends themselves, he says, expect
that I will do myself what he calls, this justice: why else do they
confine me? He urges, that, thus treated, the independence I have a
right to will be my sufficient excuse, going but from their house to my
own, if I choose that measure; or in order to take possession of my
own, if I do not: that all the disgrace I can receive, they have already
given me: that his concern and his family's concern in my honour, will
be equal to my own, if he may be so happy ever to call me his: and he
presumes, he says, to aver, that no family can better supply the loss
of my own friends to me than his, in whatever way I shall do them the
honour to accept of his and their protection.

'But he repeats, that, in all events, he will oppose my being carried to
my uncle's; being well assured, that I shall be lost to him for ever, if
once I enter into that house.' He tells me, 'That my brother and sister,
and Mr. Solmes, design to be there to receive me: that my father and
mother will not come near me till the ceremony is actually over: and
that then they will appear, in order to try to reconcile me to my odious
husband, by urging upon me the obligations I shall be supposed to be
under from a double duty.'

How, my dear, am I driven on one side, and invited on the other!--This
last intimation is but a too probable one. All the steps they take seem
to tend to this! And, indeed, they have declared almost as much.

He owns, 'That he has already taken his measures upon this
intelligence:--but that he is so desirous for my sake (I must suppose,
he says, that he owes them no forbearance for their own) to avoid coming
to extremities, that he has suffered a person, whom they do not suspect,
to acquaint them with his resolutions, as if come at by accident, if
they persist in their design to carry me by violence to my uncle's;
in hopes, that they may be induced from the fear of mischief which
may ensue, to change their measures: and yet he is aware, that he has
exposed himself to the greatest risques by having caused this intimation
to be given them; since, if he cannot benefit himself by their fears,
there is no doubt but they will doubly guard themselves against him upon
it.'

What a dangerous enterpriser, however, is this man!

'He begs a few lines from me by way of answer to this letter, either
this evening, or to-morrow morning. If he be not so favoured, he shall
conclude, from what he knows of the fixed determination of my relations,
that I shall be under a closer restraint than before: and he shall be
obliged to take his measures according to that presumption.'

You will see by this abstract, as well by his letter preceding this,
(for both run in the same strain,) how strangely forward the difficulty
of my situation has brought him in his declarations and proposals; and
in his threatenings too: which, but for that, I would not take from him.

Something, however, I must speedily resolve upon, or it will be out of
my power to help myself.

Now I think of it, I will enclose his letter, (so might have spared the
abstract of it,) that you may the better judge of all his proposals, and
intelligence; and les it should fall into other hands. I cannot forgive
the contents, although I am at a loss what answer to return.*


     * She accordingly encloses Mr. Lovelace's letter. But as the
     most material contents of it are given in her abstract, it
     is omitted.


I cannot bear the thoughts of throwing myself upon the protection of his
friends:--but I will not examine his proposals closely till I hear from
you. Indeed, I have no eligible hope, but in your mother's goodness Hers
is a protection I could more reputably fly to, than to that of any other
person: and from hers should be ready to return to my father's (for the
breach then would not be irreparable, as it would be, if I fled to
his family): to return, I repeat, on such terms as shall secure but my
negative; not my independence: I do not aim at that (so shall lay your
mother under the less difficulty); though I have a right to be put
into possession of my grandfather's estate, if I were to insist upon
it:--such a right, I mean, as my brother exerts in the bid, that I
should ever think myself freed from my father's reasonable controul,
whatever right my grandfather's will has given me! He, good gentleman,
left me that estate, as a reward of my duty, and not to set me above
it, as has been justly hinted to me: and this reflection makes me more
fearful of not answering the intention of so valuable a bequest.--Oh!
that my friends knew but my heart!--Would but think of it as they used
to do!--For once more, I say, If it deceive me not, it is not altered,
although theirs are!

Would but your mother permit you to send her chariot, or chaise, to the
bye-place where Mr. Lovelace proposes Lord M.'s shall come, (provoked,
intimidated, and apprehensive, as I am,) I would not hesitate a moment
what to do. Place me any where, as I have said before--in a cot, in a
garret; any where--disguised as a servant--or let me pass as a servant's
sister--so that I may but escape Mr. Solmes on one hand, and the
disgrace of refuging with the family of a man at enmity with my own,
on the other; and I shall be in some measure happy!--Should your
good mother refuse me, what refuge, or whose, can I fly to?--Dearest
creature, advise your distressed friend.


*****


I broke off here--I was so excessively uneasy, that I durst not trust
myself with my own reflections. I therefore went down to the garden, to
try to calm my mind, by shifting the scene. I took but one turn upon the
filbert-walk, when Betty came to me. Here, Miss, is your papa--here
is your uncle Antony--here is my young master--and my young mistress,
coming to take a walk in the garden; and your papa sends me to see where
you are, for fear he should meet you.

I struck into an oblique path, and got behind the yew-hedge, seeing my
sister appear; and there concealed myself till they were gone past me.

My mother, it seems is not well. My poor mother keeps her
chamber--should she be worse, I should have an additional unhappiness,
in apprehension that my reputed undutifulness had touched her heart.

You cannot imagine what my emotions were behind the yew-hedge, on seeing
my father so near me. I was glad to look at him through the hedge as he
passed by: but I trembled in every joint, when I heard him utter these
words: Son James, to you, and to you Bella, and to you, Brother, do I
wholly commit this matter. That I was meant, I cannot doubt. And yet,
why was I so affected; since I may be said to have been given up to the
cruelty of my brother and sister for many days past?


*****


While my father remained in the garden, I sent my dutiful compliments
to my mother, with inquiry after her health, by Shorey, whom I met
accidentally upon the stairs; for none of the servants, except my
gaoleress, dare to throw themselves in my way. I had the mortification
of such a return, as made me repent my message, though not my concern
for her health. 'Let her not inquire after the disorders she occasions,'
was her harsh answer. 'I will not receive any compliments from her.'

Very, very hard, my dear! Indeed it is very hard.


*****



I have the pleasure to hear that my mother is already better. A colicky
disorder, to which she is too subject. It is hoped it is gone off--God
send it may!--Every evil that happens in this house is owing to me!

This good news was told me, with a circumstance very unacceptable; for
Betty said, she had orders to let me know, that my garden-walks and
poultry-visits were suspected; and that both will be prohibited, if I
stay here till Saturday or Monday.

Possibly this is said by order, to make me go with less reluctance to my
uncle's.

My mother bid her say, if I expostulated about these orders, and about
my pen and ink, 'that reading was more to the purpose, at present, than
writing: that by the one, I might be taught my duty; that the other,
considering whom I was believed to write to, only stiffened my will:
that my needle-works had better be pursued than my airings; which were
observed to be taken in all weathers.'

So, my dear, if I do not resolve upon something soon, I shall neither be
able to avoid the intended evil, nor have it in my power to correspond
with you.


*****

WEDNESDAY NIGHT.

All is in a hurry below-stairs. Betty is in and out like a spy.
Something is working, I know not what. I am really a good deal
disordered in body as well as in mind. Indeed I am quite heart-sick.

I will go down, though 'tis almost dark, on pretence of getting a little
air and composure. Robert has my two former, I hope, before now: and
I will deposit this, with Lovelace's enclosed, if I can, for fear of
another search.

I know not what I shall do!--All is so strangely busy!--Doors clapt
to--going out of one apartment, hurryingly, as I may say, into another.
Betty in her alarming way, staring, as if of frighted importance; twice
with me in half an hour; called down in haste by Shorey the last time;
leaving me with still more meaning in her looks and gestures--yet
possibly nothing in all this worthy of my apprehensions--

Here again comes the creature, with her deep-drawn affected sighs, and
her O dear's! O dear's!


*****


More dark hints thrown out by the saucy creature. But she will not
explain herself. 'Suppose this pretty business ends in murder! she says.
I may rue my opposition as long as I live, for aught she knows. Parents
will not be baffled out of their children by imprudent gentlemen; nor is
it fit they should. It may come home to me when I least expect it.'

These are the gloomy and perplexing hints this impertinent throws
out. Probably they arose from the information Mr. Lovelace says he has
secretly permitted them to have (from this vile double-faced agent, I
suppose!) of his resolution to prevent my being carried to my uncle's.

How justly, if so, may this exasperate them!--How am I driven to and
fro, like a feather in the wind, at the pleasure of the rash, the
selfish, the headstrong! and when I am as averse to the proceedings of
the one, as I am to those of the other! For although I was induced to
carry on this unhappy correspondence, as I think I ought to call it, in
hopes to prevent mischief; yet indiscreet measures are fallen upon by
the rash man, before I, who am so much concerned in the event of the
present contentions, can be consulted: and between his violence on one
hand, and that of my relations on the other, I find myself in danger
from both.

O my dear! what is worldly wisdom but the height of folly!--I, the
meanest, at least youngest, of my father's family, to thrust myself
in the gap between such uncontroulable spirits!--To the intercepting
perhaps of the designs of Providence, which may intend to make those
hostile spirits their own punishers.--If so, what presumption!--Indeed,
my dear friend, I am afraid I have thought myself of too much
consequence. But, however this be, it is good, when calamities befal us,
that we should look into ourselves, and fear.

If I am prevented depositing this and the enclosed, (as I intend to try
to do, late as it is,) I will add to it as occasion shall offer. Mean
time, believe me to be

Your ever-affectionate and grateful CL. HARLOWE.

Under the superscription, written with a pencil, after she went down.

'My two former are not yet taken away--I am surprised--I hope you are
well--I hope all is right betwixt your mother and you.'




LETTER XXXVII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE THURSDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.

I have your three letters. Never was there a creature more impatient on
the most interesting uncertainty than I was, to know the event of the
interview between you and Solmes.

It behoves me to account to my dear friend, in her present unhappy
situation, for every thing that may have the least appearance of
negligence or remissness on my part. I sent Robin in the morning early,
in hopes of a deposit. He loitered about the place till near ten to
no purpose; and then came away; my mother having given him a letter to
carry to Mr. Hunt's, which he was to deliver before three, when only, in
the day-time, that gentleman is at home; and to bring back an answer to
it. Mr. Hunt's house, you know, lies wide from Harlowe-place. Robin but
just saved his time; and returned not till it was too late to send him
again. I only could direct him to set out before day this morning; and
if he got any letter, to ride as for his life to bring it to me.

I lay by myself: a most uneasy night I had through impatience; and being
discomposed with it, lay longer than usual. Just as I was risen, in came
Kitty, from Robin, with your three letters. I was not a quarter dressed;
and only slipt on my morning sack; proceeding no further till I had
read them all through, long as they are: and yet I often stopped to rave
aloud (though by myself) at the devilish people you have to deal with.

How my heart rises at them all! How poorly did they design to trick
you into an encouragement of Solmes, from the extorted interview!--I
am very, very angry at your aunt Hervey--to give up her own judgment so
tamely!--and, not content to do so, to become such an active instrument
in their hands!--But it is so like the world!--so like my mother
too!--Next to her own child, there is not any body living she values so
much as you:--Yet it is--Why should we embroil ourselves, Nancy, with
the affairs of other people?

Other people!--How I hate the poor words, where friendship is concerned,
and where the protection to be given may be of so much consequence to a
friend, and of so little detriment to one's self?

I am delighted with your spirit, however. I expected it not from you
Nor did they, I am sure. Nor would you, perhaps, have exerted it, if
Lovelace's intelligence of Solmes's nursery-offices had not set you up.
I wonder not that the wretch is said to love you the better for it. What
an honour would it be to him to have such a wife? And he can be even
with you when you are so. He must indeed be a savage, as you say.--Yet
he is less to blame for his perseverance, than those of your own family,
whom most you reverence for theirs.

It is well, as I have often said, that I have not such provocations
and trials; I should perhaps long ago have taken your cousin Dolly's
advice--yet dare I not to touch that key.--I shall always love the good
girl for her tenderness to you.

I know not what to say of Lovelace; nor what to think of his promises,
nor of his proposals to you. 'Tis certain that you are highly esteemed
by all his family. The ladies are persons of unblemished honour. My Lord
M. is also (as men and peers go) a man of honour. I could tell what to
advise any other person in the world to do but you. So much expected
from you!--Such a shining light!--Your quitting your father's house, and
throwing yourself into the protection of a family, however honourable,
that has a man in it, whose person, parts, declarations, and
pretensions, will be thought to have engaged your warmest
esteem;--methinks I am rather for advising that you should get privately
to London; and not to let either him, or any body else but me, know
where you are, till your cousin Morden comes.

As to going to your uncle's, that you must not do, if you can help
it. Nor must you have Solmes, that's certain: Not only because of his
unworthiness in every respect, but because of the aversion you have so
openly avowed to him; which every body knows and talks of; as they do
of your approbation of the other. For your reputation sake therefore,
as well as to prevent mischief, you must either live single, or have
Lovelace.

If you think of going to London, let me know; and I hope you will have
time to allow me a further concert as to the manner of your getting
away, and thither, and how to procure proper lodgings for you.

To obtain this time, you must palliate a little, and come into some
seeming compromise, if you cannot do otherwise. Driven as you are
driven, it will be strange if you are not obliged to part with a few of
your admirable punctilio's.

You will observe from what I have written, that I have not succeeded
with my mother.

I am extremely mortified and disappointed. We have had very strong
debates upon it. But, besides the narrow argument of embroiling
ourselves with other people's affairs, as above-mentioned, she will have
it, that it is your duty to comply. She says, she was always of opinion
that daughters should implicitly submit to the will of their parents in
the great article of marriage; and that she governed herself accordingly
in marrying my father; who at first was more the choice of her parents
than her own.

This is what she argues in behalf of her favourite Hickman, as well as
for Solmes in your case.

I must not doubt, but my mother always governed herself by this
principle--because she says she did. I have likewise another reason to
believe it; which you shall have, though it may not become me to give
it--that they did not live so happily together, as one would hope people
might do who married preferring each other at the time to the rest of
the world.

Somebody shall fare never the better for this double-meant policy of my
mother, I do assure you. Such a retrospection in her arguments to
him, and to his address, it is but fit that he should suffer for my
mortification in failing to carry a point upon which I had set my whole
heart.

Think, my dear, if in any way I can serve you. If you allow of it,
I protest I will go off privately with you, and we will live and die
together. Think of it. Improve upon my hint, and command me.

A little interruption.--What is breakfast to the subject I am upon?


*****


London, I am told, is the best hiding-place in the world. I have written
nothing but what I will stand in to at the word of command. Women love
to engage in knight-errantry, now-and-then, as well as to encourage
it in the men. But in your case, what I propose will not seem to have
anything of that nature in it. It will enable me to perform what is no
more than a duty in serving and comforting a dear and worthy friend, who
labours under undeserved oppression: and you will ennoble, as I may say,
your Anna Howe, if you allow her to be your companion in affliction.

I will engage, my dear, we shall not be in town together one month,
before we surmount all difficulties; and this without being beholden to
any men-fellows for their protection.

I must repeat what I have often said, that the authors of your
persecutions would not have presumed to set on foot their selfish
schemes against you, had they not depended upon the gentleness of your
spirit; though now, having gone so far, and having engaged Old AUTHORITY
in it, [chide me if you will!] neither he nor they know how to recede.

When they find you out of their reach, and know that I am with you,
you'll see how they'll pull in their odious horns.

I think, however, that you should have written to your cousin Morden,
the moment they had begun to treat you disgracefully.

I shall be impatient to hear whether they will attempt to carry you to
your uncle's. I remember, that Lord M.'s dismissed bailiff reported of
Lovelace, that he had six or seven companions as bad as himself; and
that the country was always glad when they left it.* He actually has, as
I hear, such a knot of them about him now. And, depend upon it, he will
not suffer them quietly to carry you to your uncle's: And whose must you
be, if he succeeds in taking you from them?


     * See Vol.I. Letter IV.


I tremble for you but upon supposing what may be the consequence of a
conflict upon this occasion. Lovelace owes some of them vengeance. This
gives me a double concern, that my mother should refuse her consent to
the protection I had set my heart upon procuring for you.

My mother will not breakfast without me. A quarrel has its conveniencies
sometimes. Yet too much love, I think, is as bad as too little.


*****


We have just now had another pull. Upon my word, she is
excessively--what shall I say?--unpersuadable--I must let her off with
that soft word.

Who was the old Greek, that said, he governed Athens; his wife, him; and
his son, her?

It was not my mother's fault [I am writing to you, you know] that she
did not govern my father. But I am but a daughter!--Yet I thought I was
not quite so powerless when I was set upon carrying a point, as I find
myself to be.

Adieu, my dear!--Happier times must come--and that quickly too.--The
strings cannot long continue to be thus overstrained. They must break
or be relaxed. In either way, the certainty must be preferable to the
suspense.

One word more:

I think in my conscience you must take one of these two alternatives;
either to consent to let us go to London together privately; [in which
case, I will procure a vehicle, and meet you at your appointment at the
stile to which Lovelace proposes to bring his uncle's chariot;] or,
to put yourself into the protection of Lord M. and the ladies of his
family.

You have another, indeed; and that is, if you are absolutely resolved
against Solmes, to meet and marry Lovelace directly.

Whichsoever of these you make choice of, you will have this plea,
both to yourself, and to the world, that you are concluded by the same
uniform principle that has governed your whole conduct, ever since the
contention between Lovelace and your brother has been on foot: that
is to say, that you have chosen a lesser evil, in hopes to prevent a
greater.

Adieu! and Heaven direct for the best my beloved creature, prays

Her ANNA HOWE.




LETTER XXXVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY, APRIL 6.


I thank you, my dearest friend, for the pains you have taken in
accounting so affectionately for my papers not being taken away
yesterday; and for the kind protection you would have procured for me,
if you could.

This kind protection was what I wished for: but my wishes, raised at
first by your love, were rather governed by my despair of other refuge
[having before cast about, and not being able to determine, what I
ought to do, and what I could do, in a situation so unhappy] than by a
reasonable hope: For why indeed should any body embroil themselves for
others, when they can avoid it?

All my consolation is, as I have frequently said, that I have not, by my
own inadvertence or folly, brought myself into this sad situation. If I
had, I should not have dared to look up to any body with the expectation
of protection or assistance, nor to you for excuse of the trouble I give
you. But nevertheless we should not be angry at a person's not doing
that for ourselves, or for our friend, which she thinks she ought not to
do; and which she has it in her option either to do, or to let it alone.
Much less have you a right to be displeased with so prudent a mother,
for not engaging herself so warmly in my favour, as you wished she
would. If my own aunt can give me up, and that against her judgment, as
I may presume to say; and if my father and mother, and uncles, who once
loved me so well, can join so strenuously against me; can I expect, or
ought you, the protection of your mother, in opposition to them?

Indeed, my dear love, [permit me to be very serious,] I am afraid I am
singled out (either for my own faults, or for the faults of my
family, or perhaps for the faults of both) to be a very unhappy
creature!--signally unhappy! For see you not how irresistible the waves
of affliction come tumbling down upon me?

We have been till within these few weeks, every one of us, too happy. No
crosses, no vexations, but what we gave ourselves from the pamperedness,
as I may call it, of our own wills. Surrounded by our heaps and stores,
hoarded up as fast as acquired, we have seemed to think ourselves out
of the reach of the bolts of adverse fate. I was the pride of all my
friends, proud myself of their pride, and glorying in my standing. Who
knows what the justice of Heaven may inflict, in order to convince us,
that we are not out of the reach of misfortune; and to reduce us to a
better reliance, than what we have hitherto presumptuously made?

I should have been very little the better for the conversation-visits
with the good Dr. Lewen used to honour me with, and for the principles
wrought (as I may say) into my earliest mind by my pious Mrs. Norton,
founded on her reverend father's experience, as well as on her own, if
I could not thus retrospect and argue, in such a strange situation as we
are in. Strange, I may well call it; for don't you see, my dear, that we
seem all to be impelled, as it were, by a perverse fate, which none of
us are able to resist?--and yet all arising (with a strong appearance
of self-punishment) from ourselves? Do not my parents see the hopeful
children, from whom they expected a perpetuity of worldly happiness
to their branching family, now grown up to answer the till now distant
hope, setting their angry faces against each other, pulling up by the
roots, as I may say, that hope which was ready to be carried into a
probable certainty?

Your partial love will be ready to acquit me of capital and intentional
faults:--but oh, my dear! my calamities have humbled me enough to make
me turn my gaudy eye inward; to make me look into myself.--And what have
I discovered there?--Why, my dear friend, more secret pride and vanity
than I could have thought had lain in my unexamined heart.

If I am to be singled out to be the punisher of myself and family, who
so lately was the pride of it, pray for me, my dear, that I may not
be left wholly to myself; and that I may be enabled to support my
character, so as to be justly acquitted of wilful and premeditated
faults. The will of Providence be resigned to in the rest: as that
leads, let me patiently and unrepiningly follow!--I shall not live
always!--May but my closing scene be happy!

But I will not oppress you, my dearest friend, with further reflections
of this sort. I will take them all into myself. Surely I have a mind
that has room for them. My afflictions are too sharp to last long. The
crisis is at hand. Happier times you bid me hope for. I will hope.


*****


But yet, I cannot be but impatient at times, to find myself thus driven,
and my character so depreciated and sunk, that were all the future to be
happy, I should be ashamed to shew my face in public, or to look up. And
all by the instigation of a selfish brother, and envious sister--

But let me stop: let me reflect!--Are not these suggestions the
suggestions of the secret pride I have been censuring? Then, already
so impatient! but this moment so resigned, so much better disposed
for reflection! yet 'tis hard, 'tis very hard, to subdue an embittered
spirit!--in the instant of its trial too!--O my cruel brother!--but
now it rises again.--I will lay down a pen I am so little able
to govern.--And I will try to subdue an impatience, which (if my
afflictions are sent me for corrective ends) may otherwise lead me into
still more punishable errors.--


*****


I will return to a subject, which I cannot fly from for ten minutes
together--called upon especially, as I am, by your three alternatives
stated in the conclusion of your last.

As to the first; to wit, your advice for me to escape to London--let me
tell you, that the other hint or proposal which accompanies it perfectly
frightens me--surely, my dear, (happy as you are, and indulgently
treated as your mother treats you,) you cannot mean what you propose!
What a wretch must I be, if, for one moment only, I could lend an ear
to such a proposal as this!--I, to be the occasion of making such
a mother's (perhaps shortened) life unhappy to the last hour of
it!--Ennoble you, my dear creature! How must such an enterprise (the
rashness public, the motives, were they excusable, private) debase
you!--but I will not dwell upon the subject--for your own sake I will
not.

As to your second alternative, to put myself into the protection of Lord
M. and of the ladies of that family, I own to you, (as I believe I have
owned before,) that although to do this would be the same thing in the
eye of the world as putting myself into Mr. Lovelace's protection, yet
I think I would do it rather than be Mr. Solmes's wife, if there were
evidently no other way to avoid being so.

Mr. Lovelace, you have seen, proposes to contrive a way to put me into
possession of my own house; and he tells me, that he will soon fill
it with the ladies of his family, as my visiters;--upon my invitation,
however, to them. A very inconsiderate proposal I think it to be,
and upon which I cannot explain myself to him. What an exertion of
independency does it chalk out for me! How, were I to attend to him,
(and not to the natural consequences to which the following of his
advice would lead me,) might I be drawn by gentle words into the
penetration of the most violent acts!--For how could I gain possession,
but either by legal litigation, which, were I inclined to have recourse
to it, (as I never can be,) must take up time; or by forcibly turning
out the persons whom my father has placed there, to look after the
gardens, the house, and the furniture--persons entirely attached to
himself, and who, as I know, have been lately instructed by my brother?

Your third alternative, to meet and marry Mr. Lovelace directly; a man
with whose morals I am far from being satisfied--a step, that could
not be taken with the least hope of ever obtaining pardon from or
reconciliation with any of my friends; and against which a thousand
objections rise in my mind--that is not to be thought of.

What appears to me, upon the fullest deliberation, the most eligible,
if I must be thus driven, is the escaping to London. But I would forfeit
all my hopes of happiness in this life, rather than you should go away
with me, as you rashly, though with the kindest intentions, propose.
If I could get safely thither, and be private, methinks I might remain
absolutely independent of Mr. Lovelace, and at liberty either to make
proposals to my friends, or, should they renounce me, (and I had no
other or better way,) to make terms with him; supposing my cousin
Morden, on his arrival, were to join with my other relations. But they
would then perhaps indulge me in my choice of a single life, on giving
him up: the renewing to them this offer, when at my own liberty, will
at least convince them, that I was in earnest when I made it first: and,
upon my word, I would stand to it, dear as you seem to think, when you
are disposed to rally me, it would cost me, to stand to it.

If, my dear, you can procure a vehicle for us both, you can perhaps
procure one for me singly: but can it be done without embroiling
yourself with your mother, or her with our family?--Be it coach,
chariot, chaise, wagon, or horse, I matter not, provided you appear not
to have a hand in my withdrawing. Only, in case it be one of the two
latter, I believe I must desire you to get me an ordinary gown and coat,
or habit, of some servant; having no concert with any of our own: the
more ordinary the better. They must be thrust on in the wood-house;
where I can put them on; and then slide down from the bank, that
separates the wood-yard from the green lane.

But, alas! my dear, this, even this alternative, is not without
difficulties, which, to a spirit so little enterprising as mine, seem in
a manner insuperable. These are my reflections upon it.

I am afraid, in the first place, that I shall not have time for the
requisite preparations for an escape.

Should I be either detected in those preparations, or pursued and
overtaken in my flight, and so brought back, then would they think
themselves doubly warranted to compel me to have their Solmes: and,
conscious of an intended fault, perhaps, I should be the less able to
contend with them.

But were I even to get safely to London, I know nobody there but by
name; and those the tradesmen to our family; who, no doubt, would be
the first written to and engaged to find me out. And should Mr. Lovelace
discover where I was, and he and my brother meet, what mischiefs
might ensue between them, whether I were willing or not to return to
Harlowe-place!

But supposing I could remain there concealed, to what might my youth, my
sex, and unacquaintedness of the ways of that great, wicked town, expose
me!--I should hardly dare to go to church for fear of being discovered.
People would wonder how I lived. Who knows but I might pass for a kept
mistress; and that, although nobody came to me, yet, that every time I
went out, it might be imagined to be in pursuance of some assignation?

You, my dear, who alone would know where to direct to me, would be
watched in all your steps, and in all your messages; and your mother,
at present not highly pleased with our correspondence, would then have
reason to be more displeased: And might not differences follow between
her and you, that would make me very unhappy, were I to know them? And
this the more likely, as you take it so unaccountably (and, give me
leave to say, so ungenerously) into your head, to revenge yourself upon
the innocent Mr. Hickman, for all the displeasure your mother gives you.

Were Lovelace to find out my place of abode, that would be the same
thing in the eye of the world as if I had actually gone off with him:
For would he, do you think, be prevailed upon to forbear visiting me?
And then his unhappy character (a foolish man!) would be no credit to
any young creature desirous of concealment. Indeed the world, let me
escape whither, and to whomsoever I could, would conclude him to be the
contriver of it.

These are the difficulties which arise to me on revolving this scheme;
which, nevertheless, might appear surmountable to a more enterprising
spirit in my circumstances. If you, my dear, think them surmountable in
any one of the cases put, [and to be sure I can take no course, but what
must have some difficulty in it,] be pleased to let me know your free
and full thoughts upon it.

Had you, my dear friend, been married, then should I have had no doubt
but that you and Mr. Hickman would have afforded an asylum to a poor
creature more than half lost in her own apprehension for want of one
kind protecting friend!

You say I should have written to my cousin Morden the moment I was
treated disgracefully: But could I have believed that my friends would
not have softened by degrees when they saw my antipathy to their Solmes?

I had thoughts indeed several times of writing to my cousin: but by the
time an answer could have come, I imagined all would have been over, as
if it had never been: so from day to day, from week to week, I hoped on:
and, after all, I might as reasonably fear (as I have heretofore said)
that my cousin would be brought to side against me, as that some of
those I have named would.

And then to appeal a cousin [I must have written with warmth to engage
him] against a father; this was not a desirable thing to set about. Then
I had not, you know, one soul on my side; my mother herself against me.
To be sure my cousin would have suspended his judgment till he could
have arrived. He might not have been in haste to come, hoping the malady
would cure itself: but had he written, his letters probably would have
run in the qualifying style; to persuade me to submit, or them only to
relax. Had his letters been more on my side than on theirs, they would
not have regarded them: nor perhaps himself, had he come and been an
advocate for me: for you see how strangely determined they are; how they
have over-awed or got in every body; so that no one dare open their lips
in my behalf. And you have heard that my brother pushes his measures
with the more violence, that all may be over with me before my cousin's
expected arrival.

But you tell me, that, in order to gain time, I must palliate; that I
must seem to compromise with my friends: But how palliate? How seem to
compromise? You would not have me endeavour to make them believe, that I
will consent to what I never intended to consent to! You would not have
me to gain time, with a view to deceive!

To do evil, that good may come of it, is forbidden: And shall I do evil,
yet know not whether good may come of it or not?

Forbid it, heaven! that Clarissa Harlowe should have it in her thought
to serve, or even to save herself at the expense of her sincerity, and
by a studied deceit!

And is there, after all, no way to escape one great evil, but by
plunging myself into another?--What an ill-fated creature am I!--Pray
for me, my dearest Nancy!--my mind is at present so much disturbed, that
I can hardly pray for myself.




LETTER XXXIX

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE THURSDAY NIGHT.


This alarming hurry I mentioned under my date of last night, and Betty's
saucy dark hints, come out to be owing to what I guessed they were; that
is to say, to the private intimation Mr. Lovelace contrived our family
should have of his insolent resolution [insolent I must call it] to
prevent my being carried to my uncle's.

I saw at the time that it was as wrong with respect to answering his own
view, as it was insolent: For, could he think, as Betty (I suppose from
her betters) justly observed, that parents would be insulted out of
their right to dispose of their own child, by a violent man, whom they
hate; and who could have no pretension to dispute that right with them,
unless what he had from her who had none over herself? And how must
this insolence of his, aggravated as my brother is able to aggravate it,
exasperate them against me?

The rash man has indeed so far gained his point, as to intimidate them
from attempting to carry me away: but he has put them upon a surer and
a more desperate measure: and this has driven me also into one as
desperate; the consequence of which, although he could not foresee it,*
may perhaps too well answer his great end, little as he deserves to have
it answered.


     * She was mistaken in this. Mr. Lovelace did foresee this
     consequence. All his contrivances led to it, and the whole
     family, as he boasts, unknown to themselves, were but so
     many puppets danced by his wires. See Vol.I. Letter XXXI.


In short, I have done, as far as I know, the most rash thing that ever I
did in my life.

But let me give you the motive, and then the action will follow of
course.

About six o'clock this evening, my aunt (who stays here all night, on my
account, no doubt) came up and tapped at my door; for I was writing;
and had locked myself in. I opened it; and she entering, thus delivered
herself:

I come once more to visit you, my dear; but sorely against my will;
because it is to impart to you matters of the utmost concern to you, and
to the whole family.

What, Madam, is now to be done with me? said I, wholly attentive.

You will not be hurried away to your uncle's, child; let that comfort
you.--They see your aversion to go.--You will not be obliged to go to
your uncle Antony's.

How you revive me, Madam! this is a cordial to my heart!

I little thought, my dear, what was to follow this supposed
condescension.

And then I ran over with blessings for this good news, (and she
permitted me so to do, by her silence); congratulating myself, that
I thought my father could not resolve to carry things to the last
extremity.--

Hold, Niece, said she, at last--you must not give yourself too much joy
upon the occasion neither.--Don't be surprised, my dear.--Why look you
upon me, child, with so affecting an earnestness?--but you must be Mrs.
Solmes, for all that.

I was dumb.

She then told me, that they had undoubted information, that a certain
desperate ruffian (I must excuse her that word, she said) had prepared
armed men to way-lay my brother and uncles, and seize me, and carry me
off.--Surely, she said, I was not consenting to a violence that might be
followed by murder on one side or the other; perhaps on both.

I was still silent.

That therefore my father (still more exasperated than before) had
changed his resolution as to my going to my uncle's; and was determined
next Tuesday to set out thither himself with my mother; and that (for
it was to no purpose to conceal a resolution so soon to be put into
execution)--I must not dispute it any longer--on Wednesday I must give
my hand--as they would have me.

She proceeded, that orders were already given for a license: that the
ceremony was to be performed in my own chamber, in presence of all my
friends, except of my father and mother; who would not return, nor see
me, till all was over, and till they had a good account of my behaviour.

The very intelligence, my dear!--the very intelligence this, which
Lovelace gave me!

I was still dumb--only sighing, as if my heart would break.

She went on, comforting me, as she thought. 'She laid before me the
merit of obedience; and told me, that if it were my desire that my
Norton should be present at the ceremony, it would be complied with:
that the pleasure I should receive from reconciling al my friends to me,
and in their congratulations upon it, must needs overbalance, with such
a one as me, the difference of persons, however preferable I might think
the one man to the other: that love was a fleeting thing, little better
than a name, where mortality and virtue did not distinguish the object
of it: that a choice made by its dictates was seldom happy; at least not
durably so: nor was it to be wondered at, when it naturally exalted the
object above its merits, and made the lover blind to faults, that were
visible to every body else: so that when a nearer intimacy stript it of
its imaginary perfections, it left frequently both parties surprised,
that they could be so grossly cheated; and that then the indifference
became stronger than the love ever was. That a woman gave a man great
advantages, and inspired him with great vanity, when she avowed her
love for him, and preference of him; and was generally requited with
insolence and contempt: whereas the confessedly-obliged man, it was
probable, would be all reverence and gratitude'--and I cannot tell what.

'You, my dear, said she, believe you shall be unhappy, if you have
Mr. Solmes: your parents think the contrary; and that you will be
undoubtedly so, were you to have Mr. Lovelace, whose morals are
unquestionably bad: suppose it were your sad lot to consider, what
great consolation you will have on one hand, if you pursue your parents'
advice, that you did so; what mortification on the other, that by
following your own, you have nobody to blame but yourself.'

This, you remember, my dear, was an argument enforced upon me by Mrs.
Norton.

These and other observations which she made were worthy of my aunt
Hervey's good sense and experience, and applied to almost any young
creature who stood in opposition to her parents' will, but one who had
offered to make the sacrifices I have offered to make, ought to have had
their due weight. But although it was easy to answer some of them in my
own particular case; yet having over and over, to my mother, before my
confinement, and to my brother and sister, and even to my aunt Hervey,
since, said what I must now have repeated, I was so much mortified and
afflicted at the cruel tidings she brought me, that however attentive I
was to what she said, I had neither power nor will to answer one word;
and, had she not stopped of herself, she might have gone on an hour
longer, without interruption from me.

Observing this, and that I only sat weeping, my handkerchief covering
my face, and my bosom heaving ready to burst; What! no answer, my
dear?--Why so much silent grief? You know I have always loved you. You
know, that I have no interest in the affair. You would not permit Mr.
Solmes to acquaint you with some things which would have set your heart
against Mr. Lovelace. Shall I tell you some of the matters charged
against him?--shall I, my dear?

Still I answered only by my tears and sighs.

Well, child, you shall be told these things afterwards, when you will be
in a better state of mind to hear them; and then you will rejoice in the
escape you will have had. It will be some excuse, then, for you to plead
for your behaviour to Mr. Solmes, that you could not have believed Mr.
Lovelace had been so very vile a man.

My heart fluttered with impatience and anger at being so plainly talked
to as the wife of this man; but yet I then chose to be silent. If I had
spoken, it would have been with vehemence.

Strange, my dear, such silence!--Your concern is infinitely more on this
side the day, than it will be on the other.--But let me ask you, and do
not be displeased, Will you choose to see what generous stipulations
for you there are in the settlements?--You have knowledge beyond your
years--give the writings a perusal: do, my dear: they are engrossed, and
ready for signing, and have been for some time. Excuse me, my love--I
mean not to disorder you:--your father would oblige me to bring them up,
and to leave them with you. He commands you to read them. But to read
them, Niece--since they are engrossed, and were before you made them
absolutely hopeless.

And then, to my great terror, she drew some parchments form her
handkerchief, which she had kept, (unobserved by me,) under her apron;
and rising, put them in the opposite window. Had she produced a serpent,
I could not have been more frightened.

Oh! my dearest Aunt, turning away my face, and holding out my hands,
hide from my eyes those horrid parchments!--Let me conjure you to tell
me--by all the tenderness of near relationship, and upon your honour,
and by your love for me, say, Are they absolutely resolved, that, come
what will, I must be that man's?

My dear, you must have Mr. Solmes: indeed you must.

Indeed I never will!--This, as I have said over and over, is not
originally my father's will.--Indeed I never will--and that is all I
will say!

It is your father's will now, replied my aunt: and, considering how
all the family is threatened by Mr. Lovelace, and the resolution he has
certainly taken to force you out of their hands, I cannot but say they
are in the right, not to be bullied out of their child.

Well, Madam, then nothing remains for me to say. I am made desperate. I
care not what becomes of me.

Your piety, and your prudence, my dear, and Mr. Lovelace's immoral
character, together with his daring insults, and threatenings, which
ought to incense you, as much as any body, are every one's dependence.
We are sure the time will come, when you'll think very differently of
the steps your friends take to disappoint a man who has made himself so
justly obnoxious to them all.

She withdrew; leaving me full of grief and indignation:--and as much
out of humour with Mr. Lovelace as with any body; who, by his conceited
contrivances, has made things worse for me than before; depriving me
of the hopes I had of gaining time to receive your advice, and private
assistance to get to town; and leaving me not other advice, in all
appearance, than either to throw myself upon his family, or to be made
miserable for ever with Mr. Solmes. But I was still resolved to avoid
both these evils, if possible.

I sounded Betty, in the first place, (whom my aunt sent up, not thinking
it proper, as Betty told me, that I should be left by myself, and who, I
found, knew their designs,) whether it were not probable that they
would forbear, at my earnest entreaty, to push matters to the threatened
extremity.

But she confirmed all my aunt said; rejoicing (as she said they all did)
that Mr. Lovelace had given them so good a pretence to save me from him
now, and for ever.

She ran on about equipages bespoken; talked of my brother's and sister's
exultations that now the whole family would soon be reconciled to each
other: of the servants' joy upon it: of the expected license: of a visit
to be paid me by Dr. Lewen, or another clergyman, whom they named not
to her; which was to crown the work: and of other preparations, so
particular, as made me dread that they designed to surprise me into a
still nearer day than Wednesday.

These things made me excessively uneasy. I knew not what to resolve
upon.

At one time, What have I to do, thought I, but to throw myself at once
into the protection of Lady Betty Lawrance?--But then, in resentment of
his fine contrivances, which had so abominably disconcerted me, I soon
resolved to the contrary: and at last concluded to ask the favour of
another half-hour's conversation with my aunt.

I sent Betty to her with my request.

She came.

I put it to her, in the most earnest manner, to tell me, whether I might
not obtain the favour of a fortnight's respite?

She assured me, it would not be granted.

Would a week? Surely a week would?

She believed a week might, if I would promise two things: the first,
upon my honour, not to write a line out of the house, in that week:
for it was still suspected, she said, that I found means to write to
somebody. And, secondly, to marry Mr. Solmes, at the expiration of it.

Impossible! Impossible! I said with a passion--What! might not I be
obliged with one week, without such a horrid condition as the last?

She would go down, she said, that she might not seem of her own head to
put upon me what I thought a hardship so great.

She went down: and came up again.

Did I want, was the answer, to give the vilest of men an opportunity to
put his murderous schemes into execution?--It was time for them to put
an end to my obstinacy (they were tired out with me) and to his hopes
at once. And an end should be put on Tuesday or Wednesday next, at
furthest; unless I would give my honour to comply with the condition
upon which my aunt had been so good as to allow me a longer time.

I even stamped with impatience!--I called upon her to witness, that
I was guiltless of the consequence of this compulsion; this barbarous
compulsion, I called it; let that consequence be what it would.

My aunt chid me in a higher strain than ever she did before.

While I, in a half phrensy, insisted upon seeing my father; such usage,
I said, set me above fear. I would rejoice to owe my death to him, as I
did my life.

I did go down half way of the stairs, resolved to throw myself at his
feet wherever he was.--My aunt was frighted. She owned, that she feared
for my head.--Indeed I was in a perfect phrensy for a few minutes--but
hearing my brother's voice, as talking to somebody in my sister's
apartment just by, I stopt; and heard the barbarous designer say,
speaking to my sister, This works charmingly, my dear Arabella!

It does! It does! said she, in an exulting accent.

Let us keep it up, said my brother.--The villain is caught in his own
trap!--Now must she be what we would have her be.

Do you keep my father to it; I'll take care of my mother, said Bella.

Never fear, said he!--and a laugh of congratulation to each other, and
derision of me (as I made it out) quite turned my frantic humour into a
vindictive one.

My aunt then just coming down to me, and taking my hand led me up; and
tried to sooth me.

My raving was turned into sullenness.

She preached patience and obedience to me.

I was silent.

At last she desired me to assure her, that I would offer no violence to
myself.

God, I said, had given me more grace, I hoped, than to permit me to be
guilty of so horrid a rashness, I was his creature, and not my own.

She then took leave of me; and I insisted upon her taking down with her
the odious parchments.

Seeing me in so ill an humour, and very earnest that she should take
them with her, she took them; but said, that my father should not know
that she did: and hoped I would better consider of the matter, and be
calmer next time they were offered to my perusal.

I revolved after she was gone all that my brother and sister had said.
I dwelt upon their triumphings over me; and found rise in my mind
a rancour that was new to me; and which I could not withstand.--And
putting every thing together, dreading the near day, what could I
do?--Am I in any manner excusable for what I did do?--If I shall be
condemned by the world, who know not my provocations, may I be acquitted
by you?--If not, I am unhappy indeed!--for this I did.

Having shaken off the impertinent Betty, I wrote to Mr. Lovelace, to
let him know, 'That all that was threatened at my uncle Antony's, was
intended to be executed here. That I had come to a resolution to throw
myself upon the protection of either of his two aunts, who would afford
it me--in short, that by endeavouring to obtain leave on Monday to dine
in the ivy summer-house, I would, if possible, meet him without the
garden-door, at two, three, four, or five o'clock on Monday afternoon,
as I should be able. That in the mean time he should acquaint me,
whether I might hope for either of those ladies' protection: and if I
might, I absolutely insisted that he should leave me with either, and go
to London himself, or remain at Lord M.'s; nor offer to visit me, till I
were satisfied that nothing could be done with my friends in an amicable
way; and that I could not obtain possession of my own estate, and leave
to live upon it: and particularly, that he should not hint marriage to
me, till I consented to hear him upon that subject.--I added, that if
he could prevail upon one of the Misses Montague to favour me with
her company on the road, it would make me abundantly more easy in the
thoughts of carrying into effect a resolution which I had not come to,
although so driven, but with the utmost reluctance and concern; and
which would throw such a slur upon my reputation in the eye of the
world, as perhaps I should never be able to wipe off.'

This was the purport of what I wrote; and down into the garden I slid
with it in the dark, which at another time I should not have had the
courage to do; and deposited it, and came up again unknown to any body.

My mind so dreadfully misgave me when I returned, that, to divert in
some measure my increasing uneasiness, I had recourse to my private pen;
and in a very short time ran this length.

And now, that I am come to this part, my uneasy reflections begin again
to pour in upon me. Yet what can I do?--I believe I shall take it back
again the first thing in the morning--Yet what can I do?

And who knows but they may have a still earlier day in their intention,
than that which will too soon come?

I hope to deposit this early in the morning for you, as I shall return
from resuming my letter, if I do resume it as my inwardest mind bids me.

Although it is now near two o'clock, I have a good mind to slide down
once more, in order to take back my letter. Our doors are always locked
and barred up at eleven; but the seats of the lesser hall-windows being
almost even with the ground without, and the shutters not difficult to
open, I could easily get out.

Yet why should I be thus uneasy, since, should the letter go, I can
but hear what Mr. Lovelace says to it? His aunts live at too great a
distance for him to have an immediate answer from them; so I can scruple
going to them till I have invitation. I can insist upon one of his
cousins meeting me in the chariot; and may he not be able to obtain
that favour from either of them. Twenty things may happen to afford me
a suspension at least: Why should I be so very uneasy?--When likewise
I can take back my letter early, before it is probable he will have the
thought of finding it there. Yet he owns he spends three parts of his
days, and has done for this fortnight past, in loitering about sometimes
in one disguise, sometimes in another, besides the attendance given by
his trusty servant when he himself is not in waiting, as he calls it.

But these strange forebodings!--Yet I can, if you advise, cause the
chariot he shall bring with him, to carry me directly to town, whither
in my London scheme, if you were to approve it, I had proposed to go:
and this will save you the trouble of procuring for me a vehicle; as
well as prevent any suspicion from your mother of your contributing to
my escape.

But, solicitous of your advice, and approbation too, if I can have it, I
will put an end to this letter.

Adieu, my dearest friend, adieu!




LETTER XL

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY MORNING, SEVEN O'CLOCK, APRIL
7.


My aunt Hervey, who is a very early riser, was walking in the garden
(Betty attending her, as I saw from my window this morning) when I
arose: for after such a train of fatigue and restless nights, I had
unhappily overslept myself: so all I durst venture upon, was, to step
down to my poultry-yard, and deposit mine of yesterday, and last night.
And I am just come up; for she is still in the garden. This prevents me
from going to resume my letter, as I think still to do; and hope it will
not be too late.

I said, I had unhappily overslept myself: I went to bed about half
an hour after two. I told the quarters till five; after which I dropt
asleep, and awaked not till past six, and then in great terror, from a
dream, which has made such an impression upon me, that, slightly as I
think of dreams, I cannot help taking this opportunity to relate it to
you.

'Methought my brother, my uncle Antony, and Mr. Solmes, had formed a
plot to destroy Mr. Lovelace; who discovering it, and believing I had a
hand in it, turned all his rage against me. I thought he made them all
fly to foreign parts upon it; and afterwards seizing upon me, carried
me into a church-yard; and there, notwithstanding, all my prayers and
tears, and protestations of innocence, stabbed me to the heart, and
then tumbled me into a deep grave ready dug, among two or three
half-dissolved carcases; throwing in the dirt and earth upon me with his
hands, and trampling it down with his feet.'

I awoke in a cold sweat, trembling, and in agonies; and still the
frightful images raised by it remain upon my memory.

But why should I, who have such real evils to contend with, regard
imaginary ones? This, no doubt, was owing to my disturbed imagination;
huddling together wildly all the frightful idea which my aunt's
communications and discourse, my letter to Mr. Lovelace, my own
uneasiness upon it, and the apprehensions of the dreaded Wednesday,
furnished me with.


*****

EIGHT O'CLOCK.

The man, my dear, has got the letter!--What a strange diligence! I wish
he mean me well, that he takes so much pains!--Yet, to be ingenuous, I
must own, that I should be displeased if he took less--I wish, however,
he had been an hundred miles off!--What an advantage have I given him
over me!

Now the letter is out of my power, I have more uneasiness and regret
than I had before. For, till now, I had a doubt, whether it should or
should not go: and now I think it ought not to have gone. And yet is
there any other way than to do as I have done, if I would avoid Solmes?
But what a giddy creature shall I be thought, if I pursue the course to
which this letter must lead me?

My dearest friend, tell me, have I done wrong?--Yet do not say I have,
if you think it; for should all the world besides condemn me, I shall
have some comfort, if you do not. The first time I ever besought you to
flatter me. That, of itself, is an indication that I have done wrong,
and am afraid of hearing the truth--O tell me (but yet do not tell me)
if I have done wrong!


*****


FRIDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

My aunt has made me another visit. She began what she had to say
with letting me know that my friends are all persuaded that I still
correspond with Mr. Lovelace; as is plain, she said, by hints and
menaces he throws out, which shew that he is apprized of several things
that have passed between my relations and me, sometimes within a very
little while after they have happened.

Although I approve not of the method he stoops to take to come at his
intelligence, yet it is not prudent in me to clear myself by the ruin of
the corrupted servant, (although his vileness has neither my connivance
nor approbation,) since my doing so might occasion the detection of my
own correspondence; and so frustrate all the hopes I have to avoid
this Solmes. Yet it is not at all likely, that this very agent of Mr.
Lovelace acts a double part between my brother and him: How else can our
family know (so soon too) his menaces upon the passages they hint at?

I assured my aunt, that I was too much ashamed of the treatment I met
with (and that from every one's sake as well as for my own) to acquaint
Mr. Lovelace with the particulars of that treatment, even were the means
of corresponding with him afforded me: that I had reason to think, that
if he were to know of it from me, we must be upon such terms, that
he would not scruple making some visits, which would give me great
apprehensions. They all knew, I said, that I had no communication
with any of my father's servants, except my sister's Betty Barnes: for
although I had a good opinion of them all, and believed, if left to
their own inclinations, that they would be glad to serve me; yet,
finding by their shy behaviour, that they were under particular
direction, I had forborn, ever since my Hannah had been so disgracefully
dismissed, so much as to speak to any of them, for fear I should be the
occasion of their losing their places too. They must, therefore, account
among themselves for the intelligence Mr. Lovelace met with, since
neither my brother nor sister, (as Betty had frequently, in praise of
their open hearts, informed me,) nor perhaps their favourite Mr. Solmes,
were all careful before whom they spoke, when they had any thing to
throw out against him, or even against me, whom they took great pride to
join with him on this occasion.

It was but too natural, my aunt said, for my friends to suppose that
he had his intelligence (part of it at least) from me; who, thinking
yourself hardly treated, might complain of it, if not to him, to Miss
Howe; which, perhaps, might be the same thing; for they knew Miss Howe
spoke as freely of them, as they could do of Mr. Lovelace; and must have
the particulars she spoke of from somebody who knew what was done here.
That this determined my father to bring the whole matter to a speedy
issue, lest fatal consequences should ensue.

I perceive you are going to speak with warmth, proceeded she: [and so I
was] for my own part I am sure, you would not write any thing, if you
do write, to inflame so violent a spirit.--But this is not the end of my
present visit.

You cannot, my dear, but be convinced, that your father will be obeyed.
The more you contend against his will, the more he thinks himself
obliged to assert his authority. Your mother desires me to tell you,
that if you will give her the least hopes of a dutiful compliance, she
will be willing to see you in her closet just now, while your father is
gone to take a walk in the garden.

Astonishing perseverance! said I--I am tired with making declarations
and with pleadings on this subject; and had hoped, that my resolution
being so well known, I should not have been further urged upon it.

You mistake the purport of my present visit, Miss: [looking
gravely]--Heretofore you have been desired and prayed to obey and oblige
your friends. Entreaty is at an end: they give it up. Now it is resolved
upon, that your father's will is to be obeyed; as it is fit it should.
Some things are laid at your door, as if you concurred with Lovelace's
threatened violence to carry you off, which your mother will not
believe. She will tell you her own good opinion of you. She will tell
you how much she still loves you; and what she expects of you on
the approaching occasion. But yet, that she may not be exposed to an
opposition which would the more provoke her, she desires that you will
first assure her that you go down with a resolution to do that with a
grace which must be done with or without a grace. And besides, she wants
to give you some advice how to proceed in order to reconcile yourself
to your father, and to every body else. Will you go down, Miss Clary, or
will you not?

I said, I should think myself happy, could I be admitted to my mother's
presence, after so long a banishment from it; but that I could not wish
it upon those terms.

And this is your answer, Niece?

It must be my answer, Madam. Come what may, I never will have Mr.
Solmes. It is cruel to press this matter so often upon me.--I never will
have that man.

Down she went with displeasure. I could not help it. I was quite tired
with so many attempts, all to the same purpose. I am amazed that they
are not!--So little variation! and no concession on either side!


I will go down and deposit this; for Betty has seen I have been writing.
The saucy creature took a napkin, and dipt it in water, and with a
fleering air, here, Miss; holding the wet corner to me.

What's that for? said I.

Only, Miss, one of the fingers of your right-hand, if you please to look
at it.

It was inky.

I gave her a look; but said nothing.

But, lest I should have another search, I will close here.

CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XLI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE FRIDAY, ONE O'CLOCK.


I have a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of transports, vows, and
promises. I will send it to you enclosed. You'll see how 'he engages
in it for Lady Betty's protection, and for Miss Charlotte Montague's
accompanying me. I have nothing to do, but to persevere, he says, and
prepare to receive the personal congratulations of his whole family.'

But you'll see how he presumes upon my being his, as the consequence of
throwing myself into that lady's protection.

'The chariot and six is to be ready at the place he mentions. You'll see
as to the slur upon my reputation, about which I am so apprehensive, how
boldly he argues.' Generously enough, indeed, were I to be his; and had
given him to believe that I would.--But that I have not done.

How one step brings on another with this encroaching sex; how soon a
young creature, who gives a man the least encouragement, be carried
beyond her intentions, and out of her own power! You would imagine, by
what he writes, that I have given him reason to think that my aversion
to Mr. Solmes is all owing to my favour for him.

The dreadful thing is, that comparing what he writes from his
intelligencer of what is designed against me (though he seems not to
know the threatened day) with what my aunt and Betty assure me of, there
can be no hope for me, but that I must be Solmes's wife, if I stay here.

I had better have gone to my uncle Antony's at this rate. I should
have gained time, at least, by it. This is the fruit of his fine
contrivances!

'What we are to do, and how good he is to be: how I am to direct all his
future steps.' All this shews, as I said before, that he is sure of me.

However, I have replied to the following effect: 'That although I had
given him room to expect that I would put myself into the protection
of one of the ladies of his family; yet as I have three days to come,
between this and Monday, and as I still hope that my friends will
relent, or that Mr. Solmes will give up a point they will find
impossible to carry; I shall not look upon myself as absolutely bound
by the appointment: and expect therefore, if I recede, that I shall not
again be called to account for it by him. That I think it necessary
to acquaint him, that if my throwing myself upon Lady Betty Lawrance's
protection, as he proposed, he understands, that I mean directly to put
myself into his power, he is very much mistaken: for that there are many
point in which I must be satisfied; several matters to be adjusted, even
after I have left this house, (if I do leave it,) before I can think of
giving him any particular encouragement: that in the first place he must
expect that I will do my utmost to procure my father's reconciliation
and approbation of my future steps; and that I will govern myself
entirely by his commands, in every reasonable point, as much as if I had
not left his house: that if he imagines I shall not reserve to myself
this liberty, but that my withdrawing is to give him any advantages
which he would not otherwise have had; I am determined to stay where I
am, and abide the event, in hopes that my friends will still accept
of my reiterated promise never to marry him, or any body else, without
their consent.

This I will deposit as soon as I can. And as he thinks things are near
their crisis, I dare say it will not be long before I have an answer to
it.


FRIDAY, FOUR O'CLOCK.

I am really ill. I was used to make the best of any little accidents
that befel me, for fear of making my then affectionate friends uneasy:
but now I shall make the worst of my indisposition, in hopes to obtain a
suspension of the threatened evil of Wednesday next. And if I do obtain
it, will postpone my appointment with Mr. Lovelace.

Betty has told them that I am very much indisposed. But I have no pity
from any body.

I believe I am become the object of every one's aversion; and that they
would all be glad if I were dead. Indeed I believe it. 'What ails the
perverse creature?' cries one:--'Is she love-sick?' another.

I was in the ivy summer-house, and came out shivering with cold, as
if aguishly affected. Betty observed this, and reported it.--'O no
matter!--Let her shiver on!--Cold cannot hurt her. Obstinacy will defend
her from harm. Perverseness is a bracer to a love-sick girl, and more
effectual than the cold bath to make hardy, although the constitution be
ever so tender.'

This was said by a cruel brother, and heard said by the dearer friends
of one, for whom, but a few months ago, every body was apprehensive at
the least blast of wind to which she exposed herself!

Betty, it must be owned, has an admirable memory on these occasions.
Nothing of this nature is lost by her repetition: even the very air with
which she repeats what she hears said, renders it unnecessary to ask,
who spoke this or that severe thing.


FRIDAY, SIX O'CLOCK.

My aunt, who again stays all night, just left me. She came to tell me
the result of my friends' deliberations about me. It is this:

Next Wednesday morning they are all to be assembled: to wit, my father,
mother, my uncles, herself, and my uncle Hervey; my brother and sister
of course: my good Mrs. Norton is likewise to be admitted: and Dr. Lewen
is to be at hand, to exhort me, it seems, if there be occasion: but my
aunt is not certain whether he is to be among them, or to tarry till
called in.

When this awful court is assembled, the poor prisoner is to be brought
in, supported by Mrs. Norton; who is to be first tutored to instruct me
in the duty of a child; which it seems I have forgotten.

Nor is the success at all doubted, my aunt says: since it is not
believed that I can be hardened enough to withstand the expostulations
of so venerable a judicature, although I have withstood those of several
of them separately. And still the less, as she hints at extraordinary
condescensions from my father. But what condescensions, even from my
father, can induce me to make such a sacrifice as is expected from me?

Yet my spirits will never bear up, I doubt, at such a tribunal--my
father presiding in it.

Indeed I expected that my trials would not be at an end till he had
admitted me into his awful presence.

What is hoped from me, she says, is, that I will cheerfully, on Tuesday
night, if not before, sign the articles; and so turn the succeeding
day's solemn convention into a day of festivity. I am to have the
license sent me up, however, and once more the settlements, that I may
see how much in earnest they are.

She further hinted, that my father himself would bring up the
settlements for me to sign.

O my dear! what a trial will this be!--How shall I be able to refuse my
father the writing of my name?--To my father, from whose presence I
have been so long banished!--He commanding and entreating, perhaps, in a
breath!--How shall I be able to refuse this to my father?

They are sure, she says, something is working on Mr. Lovelace's part,
and perhaps on mine: and my father would sooner follow to the grave,
than see me his wife.

I said, I was not well: that the very apprehensions of these trials were
already insupportable to me; and would increase upon me, as the time
approached; and I was afraid I should be extremely ill.

They had prepared themselves for such an artifice as that, was my aunt's
unkind word; and she could assure me, it would stand me in no stead.

Artifice! repeated I: and this from my aunt Hervey?

Why, my dear, said she, do you think people are fools?--Can they not see
how dismally you endeavour to sigh yourself down within-doors?--How you
hang down your sweet face [those were the words she was pleased to use]
upon your bosom?--How you totter, as it were, and hold by this chair,
and by that door post, when you know that any body sees you? [This, my
dear Miss Howe, is an aspersion to fasten hypocrisy and contempt upon
me: my brother's or sister's aspersion!--I am not capable of arts so
low.] But the moment you are down with your poultry, or advancing upon
your garden-walk, and, as you imagine, out of every body's sight, it is
seem how nimbly you trip along; and what an alertness governs all your
motions.

I should hate myself, said I, were I capable of such poor artifices as
these. I must be a fool to use them, as well as a mean creature; for
have I not had experience enough, that my friends are incapable of being
moved in much more affecting instances?--But you'll see how I shall be
by Tuesday.


My dear, you will not offer any violence to your health?--I hope, God
has given you more grace than to do that.

I hope he has, Madam. But there is violence enough offered, and
threatened, to affect my health; and so it will be found, without my
needing to have recourse to any other, or to artifice either.

I'll only tell you one thing, my dear: and that is, ill or well, the
ceremony will probably be performed before Wednesday night:--but this,
also, I will tell you, although beyond my present commission, That Mr.
Solmes will be under an engagement (if you should require it of him as
a favour) after the ceremony is passed, and Lovelace's hopes thereby
utterly extinguished, to leave you at your father's, and return to his
own house every evening, until you are brought to a full sense of your
duty, and consent to acknowledge your change of name.

There was no opening of my lips to such a speech as this. I was dumb.

And these, my dear Miss Howe, are they who, some of them at least, have
called me a romantic girl!--This is my chimerical brother, and wise
sister; both joining their heads together, I dare say. And yet, my aunt
told me, that the last part was what took in my mother: who had, till
that last expedient was found out, insisted, that her child should not
be married, if, through grief or opposition, she should be ill, or fall
into fits.

This intended violence my aunt often excused, by the certain information
they pretended to have, of some plots or machinations, that were
ready to break out, from Mr. Lovelace:* the effects of which were thus
cunningly to be frustrated.


     * It may not be amiss to observe in this place, that Mr.
     Lovelace artfully contrived to drive the family on, by
     permitting his and their agent Leman to report machinations,
     which he had neither intention nor power to execute.


FRIDAY, NINE O'CLOCK.

And now, my dear, what shall I conclude upon? You see how
determined--But how can I expect your advice will come time enough
to stand me in any stead? For here I have been down, and already have
another letter from Mr. Lovelace [the man lives upon the spot, I think:]
and I must write to him, either that I will or will not stand to my
first resolution of escaping hence on Monday next. If I let him know
that I will not, (appearances so strong against him and for Solmes, even
stronger than when I made the appointment,) will it not be justly deemed
my own fault, if I am compelled to marry their odious man? And if any
mischief ensue from Mr. Lovelace's rage and disappointment, will it not
lie at my door?--Yet, he offers so fair!--Yet, on the other hand, to
incur the censure of the world, as a giddy creature--but that, as he
hints, I have already incurred--What can I do?--Oh! that my cousin
Morden--But what signifies wishing?

I will here give you the substance of Mr. Lovelace's letter. The letter
itself I will send, when I have answered it; but that I will defer doing
as long as I can, in hopes of finding reason to retract an appointment
on which so much depends. And yet it is necessary you should have all
before you as I go along, that you may be the better able to advise me
in this dreadful crisis.

'He begs my pardon for writing with so much assurance; attributing it to
his unbounded transport; and entirely acquiesces to me in my will. He is
full of alternatives and proposals. He offers to attend me directly to
Lady Betty's; or, if I had rather, to my own estate; and that my Lord
M. shall protect me there.' [He knows not, my dear, my reasons for
rejecting this inconsiderate advice.] 'In either case, as soon as he
sees me safe, he will go up to London, or whither I please; and not
come near me, but by my own permission; and till I am satisfied in every
thing I am doubtful of, as well with regard to his reformation, as to
settlements, &c.

'To conduct me to you, my dear, is another of his proposals, not
doubting, he says, but your mother will receive me:* or, if that be not
agreeable to you, or to your mother, or to me, he will put me into Mr.
Hickman's protection; whom, no doubt he says, you can influence; and
that it may be given out, that I have gone to Bath, or Bristol, or
abroad; wherever I please.


     * See Note in Letter V. of this Volume.


'Again, if it be more agreeable, he proposes to attend me privately to
London, where he will procure handsome lodgings for me, and both his
cousins Montague to receive me in them, and to accompany me till
all shall be adjusted to my mind; and till a reconciliation shall
be effected; which he assures me nothing shall be wanting in him to
facilitate, greatly as he has been insulted by all my family.

'These several measures he proposes to my choice; as it was unlikely,
he says, that he could procure, in the time, a letter from Lady Betty,
under her own hand, to invite me in form to her house, unless he
had been himself to go to that lady for it; which, at this critical
juncture, while he is attending my commands, is impossible.

'He conjures me, in the most solemn manner, if I would not throw him
into utter despair, to keep to my appointment.

'However, instead of threatening my relations, or Solmes, if I recede,
he respectfully says, that he doubts not, but that, if I do, it will be
upon the reason, as he ought to be satisfied with; upon no slighter,
he hopes, than their leaving me at full liberty to pursue my own
inclinations: in which (whatever they shall be) he will entirely
acquiesce; only endeavouring to make his future good behaviour the sole
ground for his expectation of my favour.

'In short, he solemnly vows, that his whole view, at present, is to free
me from my imprisonment; and to restore me to my future happiness. He
declares, that neither the hopes he has of my future favour, nor the
consideration of his own and his family's honour, will permit him to
propose any thing that shall be inconsistent with my own most scrupulous
notions: and, for my mind's sake, should choose to have the proposed end
obtained by my friends declining to compel me. But that nevertheless, as
to the world's opinion, it is impossible to imagine that the behaviour
of my relations to me has not already brought upon my family those
free censures which they deserve, and caused the step which I am so
scrupulous about taking, to be no other than the natural and expected
consequence of their treatment of me.'

Indeed, I am afraid all this is true: and it is owing to some little
degree of politeness, that Mr. Lovelace does not say all he might on
this subject: for I have no doubt that I am the talk, and perhaps the
bye-word of half the county. If so, I am afraid I can now do nothing
that will give me more disgrace than I have already so causelessly
received by their indiscreet persecutions: and let me be whose I
will, and do what I will, I shall never wipe off the stain which my
confinement, and the rigorous usage I have received, have fixed upon me;
at least in my own opinion.

I wish, if ever I am to be considered as one of the eminent family this
man is allied to, some of them do not think the worse of me for the
disgrace I have received. In that case, perhaps, I shall be obliged to
him, if he do not. You see how much this harsh, this cruel treatment
from my own family has humbled me! But perhaps I was too much exalted
before.

Mr. Lovelace concludes, 'with repeatedly begging an interview with me;
and that, this night, if possible: an hour, he says, he is the more
encouraged to solicit for, as I had twice before made him hope for it.
But whether he obtain it or not, he beseeches me to choose one of the
alternatives he offers to my acceptance; and not to depart from my
resolution of escaping on Monday, unless the reason ceases on which I
had taken it up; and that I have a prospect of being restored to
the favour of my friends; at least to my own liberty, and freedom of
choice.'

He renews all his vows and promises on this head in so earnest and so
solemn a manner, that (his own interest, and his family's honour, and
their favour for me, co-operating) I can have no room to doubt of his
sincerity.




LETTER XLII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SAT. MORN., EIGHT O'CLOCK, APRIL 8.

Whether you will blame me or not, I cannot tell, but I have deposited
a letter confirming my resolution to leave this house on Monday next,
within the hour mentioned in my former, if possible. I have not kept a
copy of it. But this is the substance:

I tell him, 'That I have no way to avoid the determined resolution of
my friends in behalf of Mr. Solmes, but by abandoning this house by his
assistance.'

I have not pretended to make a merit with him on this score; for I
plainly tell him, 'That could I, without an unpardonable sin, die when I
would, I would sooner make death my choice, than take a step, which all
the world, if not my own heart, would condemn me for taking.'

I tell him, 'That I shall not try to bring any other clothes with me
than those I shall have on; and those but my common wearing-apparel;
lest I should be suspected. That I must expect to be denied the
possession of my estate: but that I am determined never to consent to a
litigation with my father, were I to be reduced to ever so low a state:
so that the protection I am to be obliged for to any one, must be alone
for the distress sake. That, therefore, he will have nothing to hope for
from this step that he had not before: and that in ever light I
reserve to myself to accept or refuse his address, as his behaviour and
circumspection shall appear to me to deserve.'

I tell him, 'That I think it best to go into a private lodging in the
neighbourhood of Lady Betty Lawrance; and not to her ladyship's house;
that it may not appear to the world that I have refuged myself in his
family; and that a reconciliation with my friends may not, on that
account, be made impracticable: that I will send for thither my faithful
Hannah; and apprize only Miss Howe where I am: that he shall instantly
leave me, and go to London, or to one of Lord M.'s seats; and as he had
promised not to come near me, but by my leave; contenting himself with a
correspondence by letter only.

'That if I find myself in danger of being discovered, and carried back
by violence, I will then throw myself directly into the protection
either of Lady Betty or Lady Sarah: but this only in case of absolute
necessity; for that it will be more to my reputation, for me, by the
best means I can, (taking advantage of my privacy,) to enter by a second
or third hand into a treaty of reconciliation with my friends.

'That I must, however, plainly tell him, 'That if, in this treaty, my
friends insist upon my resolving against marrying him, I will engage
to comply with them; provided they will allow me to promise him, that I
will never be the wife of any other man while he remains single, or is
living: that this is a compliment I am willing to pay him, in return for
the trouble and pains he has taken, and the usage he has met with on
my account: although I intimate, that he may, in a great measure, thank
himself (by reason of the little regard he has paid to his reputation)
for the slights he has met with.'

I tell him, 'That I may, in this privacy, write to my cousin Morden,
and, if possible, interest him in my cause.

'I take some brief notice then of his alternatives.'

You must think, my dear, that this unhappy force upon me, and this
projected flight, make it necessary for me to account to him much sooner
than I should otherwise choose to do, for every part of my conduct.

'It is not to be expected, I tell him, that your mother will embroil
herself, or suffer you or Mr. Hickman to be embroiled, on my account:
and as to his proposal of my going to London, I am such an absolute
stranger to every body there, and have such a bad opinion of the place,
that I cannot by any means think of going thither; except I should be
induced, some time hence, by the ladies of his family to attend them.

'As to the meeting he is desirous of, I think it by no means proper;
especially as it is so likely that I may soon see him. But that if any
thing occurs to induce me to change my mind, as to withdrawing, I will
then take the first opportunity to see him, and give him my reasons for
that change.

This, my dear, I the less scrupled to write, as it might qualify him to
bear such a disappointment, should I give it him; he having, besides,
behaved so very unexceptionably when he surprised me some time ago in
the lonely wood-house.

Finally, 'I commend myself, as a person in distress, and merely as such,
to his honour, and to the protection of the ladies of his family. I
repeat [most cordially, I am sure!] my deep concern for being forced to
take a step so disagreeable, and so derogatory to my honour. And having
told him, that I will endeavour to obtain leave to dine in the Ivy
Summer-house,* and to send Betty of some errand, when there, I leave the
rest to him; but imagine, that about four o'clock will be a proper time
for him to contrive some signal to let me know he is at hand, and for me
to unbolt the garden-door.'


     * The Ivy Summer-house (or Ivy Bower, as it was sometimes
     called in the family) was a place, that from a girl, this
     young lady delighted in. She used, in the summer months,
     frequently to sit and work, and read, and write, and draw,
     and (when permitted) to breakfast, and dine, and sometimes
     to sup, in it; especially when Miss Howe, who had an equal
     liking to it, was her visiter and guest.

She describes it, in another letter (which appears not) as 'pointing to
a pretty variegated landscape of wood, water, and hilly country; which
had pleased her so much, that she had drawn it; the piece hanging up, in
her parlous, among some of her other drawings.'


I added, by way of postscript, 'That their suspicions seeming to
increase, I advise him to contrive to send or some to the usual place,
as frequently as possible, in the interval of time till Monday morning
ten or eleven o'clock; as something may possibly happen to make me alter
my mind.'

O my dear Miss Howe!--what a sad, sad thing is the necessity, forced
upon me, for all this preparation and contrivance!--But it is now too
late!--But how!--Too late, did I say?--What a word is that!--What a
dreadful thing, were I to repent, to find it to be too late to remedy
the apprehended evil!


SATURDAY, TEN O'CLOCK.

Mr. Solmes is here. He is to dine with his new relations, as Betty tells
me he already calls them.

He would have thrown himself in my way once more: but I hurried up to my
prison, in my return from my garden-walk, to avoid him.

I had, when in the garden, the curiosity to see if my letter were gone:
I cannot say with an intention to take it back again if it were not,
because I see not how I could do otherwise than I have done; yet, what a
caprice! when I found it gone, I began (as yesterday morning) to wish it
had not: for no other reason, I believe, than because it was out of my
power.

A strange diligence in this man!--He says, he almost lives upon the
place; and I think so too.

He mentions, as you will see in his letter, four several disguises,
which he puts on in one day. It is a wonder, nevertheless, that he has
not been seen by some of our tenants: for it is impossible that any
disguise can hide the gracefulness of his figure. But this is to be
said, that the adjoining grounds being all in our own hands, and no
common foot-paths near that part of the garden, and through the park and
coppice, nothing can be more bye and unfrequented.

Then they are less watchful, I believe, over my garden-walks, and my
poultry-visits, depending, as my aunt hinted, upon the bad character
they have taken so much pains to fasten upon Mr. Lovelace. This, they
think, (and justly think,) must fill me with doubts. And then the regard
I have hitherto had for my reputation is another of their securities.
Were it not for these two, they would not surely have used me as they
have done; and at the same time left me the opportunities which I have
several times had, to get away, had I been disposed to do so:* and,
indeed, their dependence on both these motives would have been well
founded, had they kept but tolerable measures with me.


     * They might, no doubt, make a dependence upon the reasons
     she gives: but their chief reliance was upon the vigilance
     of their Joseph Leman; little imagining what an implement he
     was of Mr. Lovelace.


Then, perhaps, they have no notion of the back-door; as it is seldom
opened, and leads to a place so pathless and lonesome.* If not, there
can be no other way to escape (if one would) unless by the plashy lane,
so full of springs, by which your servant reaches the solitary wood
house; to which lane one must descend from a high bank, that bounds the
poultry yard. For, as to the front-way, you know, one must pass through
the house to that, and in sight of the parlours, and the servants' hall;
and then have the open courtyard to go through, and, by means of the
iron-gate, be full in view, as one passes over the lawn, for a quarter
of a mile together; the young plantations of elms and limes affording
yet but little shade or covert.


     * This, in another of her letters, (which neither is
     inserted,) is thus described:--'A piece of ruins upon it,
     the remains of an old chapel, now standing in the midst of
     the coppice; here and there an over-grown oak, surrounded
     with ivy and mistletoe, starting up, to sanctify, as it
     were, the awful solemnness of the place: a spot, too, where
     a man having been found hanging some years ago, it was used
     to be thought of by us when children, and by the maid-
     servants, with a degree of terror, (it being actually the
     habitation of owls, ravens, and other ominous birds,) as
     haunted by ghosts, goblins, specters: the genuine result of
     the country loneliness and ignorance: notions which, early
     propagated, are apt to leave impressions even upon minds
     grown strong enough at the same time to despise the like
     credulous follies in others.'


The Ivy Summer-house is the most convenient for this heart-affecting
purpose of any spot in the garden, as it is not far from the back-door,
and yet in another alley, as you may remember. Then it is seldom
resorted to by any body else, except in the summer-months, because it is
cool. When they loved me, they would often, for this reason, object to
my long continuance in it:--but now, it is no matter what becomes of me.
Besides, cold is a bracer, as my brother said yesterday.

Here I will deposit what I have written. Let me have your prayers, my
dear; and your approbation, or your censure, of the steps I have taken:
for yet it may not be quite too late to revoke the appointment. I am

Your most affectionate and faithful CL. HARLOWE.

Why will you send your servant empty-handed?




LETTER XLIII

MISS HOWE, TO MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE SAT. AFTERNOON.


By your last date of ten o'clock in your letter of this day, you could
not long have deposited it before Robin took it. He rode hard, and
brought it to be just as I had risen from table.

You may justly blame me for sending my messenger empty-handed, your
situation considered; and yet that very situation (so critical!) is
partly the reason for it: for indeed I knew not what to write, fit to
send you.

I have been inquiring privately, how to procure you a conveyance from
Harlowe-place, and yet not appear in it; knowing, that to oblige in
the fact, and to disoblige in the manner, is but obliging by halves: my
mother being moreover very suspicious, and very uneasy; made more so by
daily visits from your uncle Antony; who tells her, that every thing
is now upon the point of being determined; and hopes, that her daughter
will not so interfere, as to discourage your compliance with their
wills. This I came at by a way that I cannot take notice of, or both
should hear of it in a manner neither would like: and, without that, my
mother and I have had almost hourly bickerings.

I found more difficulty than I expected (as the time was confined, and
secrecy required, and as you so earnestly forbid me to accompany you in
your enterprise) in procuring you a vehicle. Had you not obliged me to
keep measures with my mother, I could have managed it with ease. I could
even have taken our own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put two
horses extraordinary to it, if I had thought fit; and I could, when we
had got to London, have sent it back, and nobody the wiser as to the
lodgings we might have taken.

I wish to the Lord you had permitted this. Indeed I think you are too
punctilious a great deal for you situation. Would you expect to enjoy
yourself with your usual placidness, and not to be ruffled, in an
hurricane which every moment threatens to blow your house down?

Had your distress sprung from yourself, that would have been another
thing. But when all the world knows where to lay the fault, this alters
the case.

How can you say I am happy, when my mother, to her power, is as much an
abettor of their wickedness to my dearest friend, as your aunt, or any
body else?--and this through the instigation of that odd-headed and
foolish uncle of yours, who [sorry creature that he is!] keeps her up
to resolutions which are unworthy of her, for an example to me, if it
please you. Is not this cause enough for me to ground a resentment upon,
sufficient to justify me for accompanying you; the friendship between us
so well known?

Indeed, my dear, the importance of the case considered, I must repeat,
that you are too nice. Don't they already think that your non-compliance
with their odious measures is owing a good deal to my advice? Have they
not prohibited our correspondence upon that very surmise? And have I,
but on your account, reason to value what they think?

Besides, What discredit have I to fear by such a step? What detriment?
Would Hickman, do you believe, refuse me upon it?--If he did, should
I be sorry for that?--Who is it, that has a soul, who would not be
affected by such an instance of female friendship?

But I should vex and disorder my mother!--Well, that is something: but
not more than she vexes and disorders me, on her being made an implement
by such a sorry creature, who ambles hither every day in spite to my
dearest friend--Woe be to both, if it be for a double end!--Chide me, if
you will: I don't care.

I say, and I insist upon it, such a step would ennoble your friend: and
if still you will permit it, I will take the office out of Lovelace's
hands; and, to-morrow evening, or on Monday before his time of
appointment takes place, will come in a chariot, or chaise: and then,
my dear, if we get off as I wish, will we make terms (and what terms we
please) with them all. My mother will be glad to receive her daughter
again, I warrant: and Hickman will cry for joy on my return; or he shall
for sorrow.

But you are so very earnestly angry with me for proposing such a step,
and have always so much to say for your side of any question, that I am
afraid to urge it farther.--Only be so good (let me add) as to encourage
me to resume it, if, upon farther consideration, and upon weighing
matters well, (and in this light, whether best to go off with me,
or with Lovelace,) you can get over your punctilious regard for my
reputation. A woman going away with a woman is not so discreditable a
thing, surely! and with no view, but to avoid the fellows!--I say, only
to be so good, as to consider this point; and if you can get over your
scruples on my account, do. And so I will have done with this argument
for the present; and apply myself to some of the passages in yours.

A time, I hope, will come, that I shall be able to read your affecting
narratives without the impatient bitterness which now boils over in my
heart, and would flow to my pen, were I to enter into the particulars of
what you write. And indeed I am afraid of giving you my advice at all,
or telling you what I should do in your case (supposing you will still
refuse my offer; finding too what you have been brought or rather driven
to without it); lest any evil should follow it: in which case, I
should never forgive myself. And this consideration has added to my
difficulties in writing to you now you are upon such a crisis, and yet
refuse the only method--but I said, I would not for the present touch
any more that string. Yet, one word more, chide me if you please: If any
harm betide you, I shall for ever blame my mother--indeed I shall--and
perhaps yourself, if you do not accept my offer.

But one thing, in your present situation and prospects, let me advise:
It is this, that if you do go off with Mr. Lovelace, you take the first
opportunity to marry. Why should you not, when every body will know by
whose assistance, and in whose company, you leave your father's house,
go whithersoever you will?--You may indeed keep him at a distance, until
settlements are drawn, and such like matters are adjusted to your mind:
but even these are matters of less consideration in your particular
case, than they would be in that of most others: and first, because, be
his other faults what they will, nobody thinks him an ungenerous man:
next, because the possession of your estate must be given up to you
as soon as your cousin Morden comes; who, as your trustee, will see
it done; and done upon proper terms: 3dly, because there is no want of
fortune on his side: 4thly, because all his family value you, and are
extremely desirous that you should be their relation: 5thly, because he
makes no scruple of accepting you without conditions. You see how he has
always defied your relations: [I, for my own part, can forgive him for
the fault: nor know I, if it be not a noble one:] and I dare say, he
had rather call you his, without a shilling, than be under obligation
to those whom he has full as little reason to love, as they have to love
him. You have heard, that his own relations cannot make his proud spirit
submit to owe any favour to them.

For all these reasons, I think, you may the less stand upon previous
settlements. It is therefore my absolute opinion, that, if you do
withdraw with him, (and in that case you must let him be judge when he
can leave you with safety, you'll observe that,) you should not postpone
the ceremony.

Give this matter your most serious consideration. Punctilio is out of
doors the moment you are out of your father's house. I know how justly
severe you have been upon those inexcusable creatures, whose giddiness
and even want of decency have made them, in the same hour as I may
say, leap from a parent's window to a husband's bed--but considering
Lovelace's character, I repeat my opinion, that your reputation in the
eye of the world requires no delay be made in this point, when once you
are in his power.

I need not, I am sure, make a stronger plea to you.

You say, in excuse for my mother, (what my fervent love for my friend
very ill brooks,) that we ought not to blame any one for not doing what
she has an opinion to do, or to let alone. This, in cases of friendship,
would admit of very strict discussion. If the thing requested be of
greater consequence, or even of equal, to the person sought to, and it
were, as the old phrase has it, to take a thorn out of one's friend's
foot to put in into one's own, something might be said.--Nay, it would
be, I will venture to say, a selfish thing in us to ask a favour of
a friend which would subject that friend to the same or equal
inconvenience as that from which we wanted to be relieved, The requested
would, in this case, teach his friend, by his own selfish example, with
much better reason, to deny him, and despise a friendship so merely
nominal. But if, by a less inconvenience to ourselves, we could relieve
our friend from a greater, the refusal of such a favour makes the
refuser unworthy of the name of friend: nor would I admit such a one,
not even into the outermost fold of my heart.

I am well aware that this is your opinion of friendship, as well as
mine: for I owe the distinction to you, upon a certain occasion; and it
saved me from a very great inconvenience, as you must needs remember.
But you were always for making excuses for other people, in cases
wherein you would not have allowed of one for yourself.

I must own, that were these excuses for a friend's indifference, or
denial, made by any body but you, in a case of such vast importance to
herself, and of so comparative a small one to those for whose protection
she would be thought to wish; I, who am for ever, as you have often
remarked, endeavouring to trace effects to their causes, should be
ready to suspect that there was a latent, unowned inclination, which
balancing, or preponderating rather, made the issue of the alternative
(however important) sit more lightly upon the excuser's mind than she
cared to own.

You will understand me, my dear. But if you do not, it may be well for
me; for I am afraid I shall have it from you for but starting such a
notion, or giving a hint, which perhaps, as you did once in another
case, you will reprimandingly call, 'Not being able to forego the
ostentation of sagacity, though at the expense of that tenderness which
is due to friendship and charity.'

What signifies owning a fault without mending it, you'll say?--Very
true, my dear. But you know I ever was a saucy creature--ever stood in
need of great allowances.--And I remember, likewise, that I ever had
them from my dear Clarissa. Nor do I doubt them now: for you know how
much I love you--if it be possible, more than myself I love you! Believe
me, my dear: and, in consequence of that belief, you will be able to
judge how much I am affected by your present distressful and critical
situation; which will not suffer me to pass by without a censure even
that philosophy of temper in your own cause, which you have not in
another's, and which all that know you ever admired you for.

From this critical and distressful situation, it shall be my hourly
prayers that you may be delivered without blemish to that fair fame
which has hitherto, like your heart, been unspotted.

With this prayer, twenty times repeated, concludes Your ever
affectionate, ANNA HOWE.

I hurried myself in writing this; and I hurry Robin away with it, that,
in a situation so very critical, you may have all the time possible to
consider what I have written, upon two points so very important. I will
repeat them in a very few words:

'Whether you choose not rather to go off with one of your own sex; with
your ANNA HOWE--than with one of the other; with Mr. LOVELACE?'

And if not,

'Whether you should not marry him as soon as possible?'




LETTER XLIV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE [THE PRECEDING LETTER NOT RECEIVED.]
SATURDAY AFTERNOON.


Already have I an ecstatic answer, as I may call it, to my letter.

'He promises compliance with my will in every article: approves of all
I propose; particularly of the private lodging: and thinks it a happy
expedient to obviate the censures of the busy and the unreflecting: and
yet he hopes, that the putting myself into the protection of either of
his aunts, (treated as I am treated,) would be far from being looked
upon by any body in a disreputable light. But every thing I enjoin
or resolve upon must, he says, be right, not only with respect to my
present but future reputation; with regard to which, he hopes so to
behave himself, as to be allowed to be, next to myself, more properly
solicitous than any body. He will only assure me, that his whole family
are extremely desirous to take advantage of the persecutions I labour
under to make their court, and endear themselves to me, by their best
and most cheerful services: happy if they can in any measure contribute
to my present freedom and future happiness.

'He will this afternoon, he says, write to Lord M. and to Lady Betty and
Lady Sarah, that he is now within view of being the happiest man in the
world, if it be not his own fault; since the only woman upon earth that
can make him so will be soon out of danger of being another man's; and
cannot possibly prescribe any terms to him that he shall not think it
his duty to comply with.

'He flatters himself now (my last letter confirming my resolution) that
he can be in no apprehension of my changing my mind, unless my friends
change their manner of acting by me; which he is too sure they will
not.* And now will all his relations, who take such a kind and generous
share in his interests, glory and pride themselves in the prospects he
has before him.'


     * Well might he be so sure, when he had the art to play them
     off, by his corrupted agent, and to make them all join to
     promote his views unknown to themselves; as is shewn in some
     of his preceding letters.


Thus does he hold me to it.

'As to fortune, he begs me not to be solicitous on that score: that his
own estate is sufficient for us both; not a nominal, but a real, two
thousand pounds per annum, equivalent to some estates reputed a third
more: that it never was encumbered; that he is clear of the world, both
as to book and bond debts; thanks, perhaps, to his pride, more than to
his virtue: that Lord M. moreover resolves to settle upon him a thousand
pounds per annum on his nuptials. And to this, he will have it, his
lordship is instigated more by motives of justice than of generosity; as
he must consider it was but an equivalent for an estate which he had
got possession of, to which his (Mr. Lovelace's) mother had better
pretensions. That his lordship also proposed to give him up either
his seat in Hertfordshire, or that in Lancashire, at his own or at his
wife's option, especially if I am the person. All which it will be in my
power to see done, and proper settlements drawn, before I enter into any
farther engagements with him; if I will have it so.'

He says, 'That I need not be under any solicitude as to apparel: all
immediate occasions of that sort will be most cheerfully supplied by the
ladies of his family: as my others shall, with the greatest pride and
pleasure (if I allow him that honour) by himself.

'He assures me, that I shall govern him as I please, with regard to any
thing in his power towards effecting a reconciliation with my friends:'
a point he knows my heart is set upon.

'He is afraid, that the time will hardly allow of his procuring Miss
Charlotte Montague's attendance upon me, at St. Alban's, as he had
proposed she should; because, he understands, she keeps her chamber with
a violent cold and sore throat. But both she and her sister, the first
moment she is able to go abroad, shall visit me at my private lodgings;
and introduce me to Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, or those ladies to me, as
I shall choose; and accompany me to town, if I please; and stay as long
in it with me as I shall think fit to stay there.

'Lord M. will also, at my own time, and in my own manner, (that is to
say, either publicly or privately,) make me a visit. And, for his own
part, when he has seen me in safety, either in their protection, or in
the privacy I prefer, he will leave me, and not attempt to visit me but
by my own permission.

'He had thought once, he says, on hearing of his cousin Charlotte's
indisposition, to have engaged his cousin Patty's attendance upon me,
either in or about the neighbouring village, or at St. Alban's: but, he
says, she is a low-spirited, timorous girl, and would but the more have
perplexed us.'

So, my dear, the enterprise requires courage and high spirits, you
see!--And indeed it does!--What am I about to do!

He himself, it is plain, thinks it necessary that I should be
accompanied with one of my own sex.--He might, at least, have proposed
the woman of one of the ladies of his family.--Lord bless me!--What am I
about to do!--


*****


After all, as far as I have gone, I know not but I may still recede:
and, if I do, a mortal quarrel I suppose will ensue.--And what if it
does?--Could there be any way to escape this Solmes, a breach with
Lovelace might make way for the single life to take place, which I
so much prefer: and then I would defy the sex. For I see nothing but
trouble and vexation that they bring upon ours: and when once entered,
one is obliged to go on with them, treading, with tender feet, upon
thorns, and sharper thorns, to the end of a painful journey.

What to do I know not. The more I think, the more I am embarrassed!--And
the stronger will be my doubts as the appointed time draws near.

But I will go down, and take a little turn in the garden; and deposit
this, and his letters all but the two last, which I will enclose in my
next, if I have opportunity to write another.

Mean time, my dear friend----But what can I desire you to pray
for?--Adieu, then!--Let me only say--Adieu--!




LETTER XLV

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE. [IN ANSWER TO LETTER XLIII.] SUNDAY
MORNING, APRIL 9.


Do not think, my beloved friend, although you have given me in yours
of yesterday a severer instance of what, nevertheless, I must call your
impartial love, than ever yet I received from you, that I would be
displeased with you for it. That would be to put myself into the
inconvenient situation of royalty: that is to say, out of the way of
ever being told of my faults; of ever mending them: and in the way of
making the sincerest and warmest friendship useless to me.

And then how brightly, how nobly glows in your bosom the sacred flame
of friendship; since it can make you ready to impute to the unhappy
sufferer a less degree of warmth in her own cause, than you have for
her, because of the endeavours to divest herself of self so far as to
leave others to the option which they have a right to make!--Ought I, my
dear, to blame, ought I not rather to admire you for this ardor?

But nevertheless, lest you should think that there is any foundation for
a surmise which (although it owe its rise to your friendship) would, if
there were, leave me utterly inexcusable, I must, in justice to myself,
declare, that I know not my own heart if I have any of that latent or
unowned inclination, which you would impute to any other but me. Nor
does the important alternative sit lightly on my mind. And yet I must
excuse your mother, were it but on this single consideration, that
I could not presume to reckon upon her favour, as I could upon her
daughter's, so as to make the claim of friendship upon her, to whom, as
the mother of my dearest friend, a veneration is owing, which can
hardly be compatible with that sweet familiarity which is one of the
indispensable requisites of the sacred tie by which your heart and mine
are bound in one.

What therefore I might expect from my Anna Howe, I ought not from
her mother; for would it not be very strange, that a person of her
experience should be reflected upon because she gave not up her own
judgment, where the consequence of her doing so would be to embroil
herself, as she apprehends, with a family she has lived well with,
and in behalf of a child against her parents?--as she has moreover a
daughter of her own:--a daughter too, give me leave to say, of whose
vivacity and charming spirits she is more apprehensive than she need to
be, because her truly maternal cares make her fear more from her youth,
than she hopes for her prudence; which, nevertheless, she and all the
world know to be beyond her years.

And here let me add, that whatever you may generously, and as the result
of an ardent affection for your unhappy friend, urge on this head, in my
behalf, or harshly against any one who may refuse me protection in the
extraordinary circumstances I find myself in, I have some pleasure
in being able to curb undue expectations upon my indulgent friends,
whatever were to befal myself from those circumstances, for I should be
extremely mortified, were I by my selfish forwardness to give occasion
for such a check, as to be told, that I had encouraged an unreasonable
hope, or, according to the phrase you mention, wished to take a thorn
out of my own foot, and to put in to that of my friend. Nor should I
be better pleased with myself, if, having been taught by my good Mrs.
Norton, that the best of schools is that of affliction, I should rather
learn impatience than the contrary, by the lessons I am obliged to get
by heart in it; and if I should judge of the merits of others, as they
were kind to me; and that at the expense of their own convenience or
peace of mind. For is not this to suppose myself ever in the right; and
all who do not act as I would have them act, perpetually in the wrong?
In short, to make my sake God's sake, in the sense of Mr. Solmes's
pitiful plea to me?

How often, my dear, have you and I endeavoured to detect and censure
this partial spirit in others?

But I know you do not always content yourself with saying what you think
may justly be said; but, in order the shew the extent of a penetration
which can go to the bottom of any subject, delight to say or to write
all that can be said or written, or even thought, on the particular
occasion; and this partly perhaps from being desirous [pardon me, my
dear!] to be thought mistress of a sagacity that is aforehand with
events. But who would wish to drain off or dry up a refreshing current,
because it now-and-then puts us to some little inconvenience by its
over-flowings? In other words, who would not allow for the liveliness of
a spirit which for one painful sensibility gives an hundred pleasurable
ones; and the one in consequence of the other?

But now I come to the two points in your letter, which most sensibly
concern me: Thus you put them:

'Whether I choose not rather to go off [shocking words!] with one of
my own sex; with my ANNA HOWE--than with one of the other; with Mr.
LOVELACE?'

And if not,

'Whether I should not marry him as soon as possible?'

You know, my dear, my reasons for rejecting your proposal, and even
for being earnest that you should not be known to be assisting me in an
enterprise in which a cruel necessity induced me to think of engaging;
and for which you have not the same plea. At this rate, well might
your mother be uneasy at our correspondence, not knowing to what
inconveniencies it might subject her and you!--If I am hardly excusable
to think of withdrawing from my unkind friends, what could you have to
say for yourself, were you to abandon a mother so indulgent? Does
she suspect that your fervent friendship may lead you to a small
indiscretion? and does this suspicion offend you? And would you, in
resentment, shew her and the world, that you can voluntarily rush into
the highest error that any of our sex can be guilty of?

And is it worthy of your generosity [I ask you, my dear, is it?] to
think of taking so undutiful a step, because you believe your mother
would be glad to receive you again?

I do assure you, that were I to take this step myself, I would run all
risks rather than you should accompany me in it. Have I, do you think, a
desire to double and treble my own fault in the eye of the world? in the
eye of that world which, cruelly as I am used, (not knowing all,) would
not acquit me?

But, my dearest, kindest friend, let me tell you, that we will neither
of us take such a step. The manner of putting your questions abundantly
convinces me, that I ought not, in your opinion, to attempt it. You no
doubt intend that I shall so take it; and I thank you for the equally
polite and forcible conviction.

It is some satisfaction to me (taking the matter in this light) that I
had begun to waver before I received your last. And now I tell you, that
it has absolutely determined me not to go off; at least not to-morrow.

If you, my dear, think the issue of the alternative (to use your own
words) sits so lightly upon my mind, in short, that my inclination is
faulty; the world would treat me much less scrupulously. When therefore
you represent, that all punctilio must be at an end the moment I am out
of my father's house; and hint, that I must submit it to Mr. Lovelace
to judge when he can leave me with safety; that is to say, give him the
option whether he will leave me, or not; who can bear these reflections,
who can resolve to incur these inconveniencies, that has the question
still in her own power to decide upon?

While I thought only of an escape from this house as an escape from Mr.
Solmes; that already my reputation suffered by my confinement; and that
it would be in my own option either to marry Mr. Lovelace, or wholly to
renounce him; bold as the step was, I thought, treated as I am treated,
something was to be said in excuse of it--if not to the world, to
myself: and to be self-acquitted, is a blessing to be preferred to the
option of all the world. But, after I have censured most severely, as I
have ever done, those giddy girls, who have in the same hour, as I may
say, that they have fled from their chamber, presented themselves at
the altar that is witness to their undutiful rashness; after I have
stipulated with Mr. Lovelace for time, and for an ultimate option
whether to accept or refuse him; and for his leaving me, as soon as I am
in a place of safety (which, as you observe, he must be the judge of);
and after he has signified to me his compliance with these terms; so
that I cannot, if I would, recall them, and suddenly marry;--you see,
my dear, that I have nothing left me but to resolve not to go away with
him!

But, how, on this revocation of my appointment, shall I be able to
pacify him?

How!--Why assert the privilege of my sex!--Surely, on this side of the
solemnity he has no right to be displeased. Besides, did I not reserve a
power of receding, as I saw fit? To what purpose, as I asked in the case
between your mother and you, has any body an option, if the making use
of it shall give the refused a right to be disgusted?

Far, very far, would those, who, according to the old law, have a right
of absolving or confirming a child's promise, be from ratifying mine,
had it been ever so solemn a one.* But this was rather an appointment
than a promise: and suppose it had been the latter; and that I had not
reserved to myself a liberty of revoking it; was it to preclude better
or maturer consideration?--If so, how unfit to be given!--how ungenerous
to be insisted upon!--And how unfitter still to be kept!--Is there a man
living who ought to be angry that a woman whom he hopes one day to
call his, shall refuse to keep a rash promise, when, on the maturest
deliberation, she is convinced that it was a rash one?


     * See Numb. XXX. Where it is declared, whose vows shall be
     binding, and whose not. The vows of a man, or of a widow,
     are there pronounced to be indispensable; because they are
     sole, and subject to no other domestic authority. But the
     vows of a single woman, or of a wife, if the father of the
     one, or the husband of the other, disallow of them as soon
     as they know them, are to be of no force.

     A matter highly necessary to be known; by all young ladies
     especially, whose designing addressers too often endeavour
     to engage them by vows; and then plead conscience and honour
     to them to hold them down to the performance.

     It cannot be amiss to recite the very words.

     Ver. 3 If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself
     by a bond, being in her father's house in her youth;

     4. And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she
     hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at
     her; then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith
     she hath bound her soul shall stand.

     5. But if her father disallow her in the day that he
     heareth; not any of her vows or of her bonds wherewith she
     hath bound her soul shall stand: and the Lord shall forgive
     her, because her father disallowed her.

     The same in the case of a wife, as said above. See ver. 6,
     7, 8, &c.--All is thus solemnly closed:

     Ver. 16. These are the statutes which the Lord commanded
     Moses between a man and his wife, between the father and his
     daughter, being yet in her youth in her father's house.


I resolve then, upon the whole, to stand this one trial of Wednesday
next--or, perhaps, I should rather say, of Tuesday evening, if my father
hold his purpose of endeavouring, in person, to make me read, or hear
read, and then sign, the settlements.--That, that must be the greatest
trial of all.

If I am compelled to sign them over-night--then (the Lord bless me!)
must all I dread follow, as of course, on Wednesday. If I can prevail
upon them by my prayers [perhaps I shall fall into fits; for the very
first appearance of my father, after having been so long banished his
presence, will greatly affect me--if, I say, I can prevail upon them by
my prayers] to lay aside their views; or to suspend the day, if but for
one week; but if not, but for two or three days; still Wednesday will
be a lighter day of trial. They will surely give me time to consider: to
argue with myself. This will not be promising. As I have made no
effort to get away, they have no reason to suspect me; so I may have an
opportunity, in the last resort, to withdraw. Mrs. Norton is to be with
me: she, although she should be chidden for it, will, in my extremity,
plead for me. My aunt Hervey may, in such an extremity, join with her.
Perhaps my mother may be brought over. I will kneel to each, one by one,
to make a friend. Some of them have been afraid to see me, lest they
should be moved in my favour: does not this give a reasonable hope that
I may move them? My brother's counsel, heretofore given, to turn me out
of doors to my evil destiny, may again be repeated, and may prevail;
then shall I be in no worse case than now, as to the displeasure of my
friends; and thus far better, that it will not be my fault that I seek
another protection: which even then ought to be my cousin Morden's,
rather than Mr. Lovelace's, or any other person's.

My heart, in short, misgives me less, when I resolve this way, than when
I think of the other: and in so strong and involuntary a bias, the heart
is, as I may say, conscience. And well cautions the wise man: 'Let the
counsel of thine own heart stand; for there is no man more faithful to
thee than it: for a man's mind is sometimes wont to tell him more than
seven watchmen, that sit above in a high tower.'*


     * Ecclus. xxxvii. 13, 14.


Forgive these indigested self-reasonings. I will close here: and
instantly set about a letter of revocation to Mr. Lovelace; take it
as he will. It will only be another trial of temper to him. To me of
infinite importance. And has he not promised temper and acquiescence, on
the supposition of a change in my mind?




LETTER XLVI

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE SUNDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.


Nobody it seems will go to church this day. No blessing to be expected
perhaps upon views so worldly, and in some so cruel.

They have a mistrust that I have some device in my head. Betty has been
looking among my clothes. I found her, on coming up from depositing my
letter to Lovelace (for I have written!) peering among them; for I had
left the key in the lock. She coloured, and was confounded to be caught.
But I only said, I should be accustomed to any sort of treatment in
time. If she had her orders--those were enough for her.

She owned, in her confusion, that a motion had been made to abridge
me of my airings; and the report she should make, would be of no
disadvantage to me. One of my friends, she told me, urged in my behalf,
That there was no need of laying me under greater restraint, since Mr.
Lovelace's threatening to rescue me by violence, were I to have been
carried to my uncle's, was a conviction that I had no design to go to
him voluntarily; and that if I had, I should have made preparations
of that kind before now; and, most probably, had been detected in
them.--Hence, it was also inferred, that there was no room to doubt,
but I would at last comply. And, added the bold creature, if you don't
intend to do so, your conduct, Miss, seems strange to me.--Only thus
she reconciled it, that I had gone so far, I knew not how to come off
genteelly: and she fancied I should, in full congregation, on Wednesday,
give Mr. Solmes my hand. And then said the confident wench, as the
learned Dr. Brand took his text last Sunday, There will be joy in
heaven--

This is the substance of my letter to Mr. Lovelace:

'That I have reasons of the greatest consequence to myself (and which,
when known, must satisfy him) to suspend, for the present, my intention
of leaving my father's house: that I have hopes that matters may be
brought to an happy conclusion, without taking a step, which nothing
but the last necessity could justify: and that he may depend upon my
promise, that I will die rather than consent to marry Mr. Solmes.'

And so, I am preparing myself to stand the shock of his exclamatory
reply. But be that what it will, it cannot affect me so much, as the
apprehensions of what may happen to me next Tuesday or Wednesday; for
now those apprehensions engage my whole attention, and make me sick at
the very heart.


SUNDAY, FOUR IN THE AFTERNOON.

My letter is not yet taken away--If he should not send for it, or take
it, or come hither on my not meeting him to-morrow, in doubt of what
may have befallen me, what shall I do! Why had I any concerns with this
sex!--I, that was so happy till I knew this man!

I dined in the ivy summer-house. My request to do so, was complied with
at the first word. To shew I meant nothing, I went again into the house
with Betty, as soon as I had dined. I thought it was not amiss to ask
this liberty; the weather seemed to be set in fine. Who knows what
Tuesday or Wednesday may produce?


SUNDAY EVENING, SEVEN O'CLOCK.

There remains my letter still!--He is busied, I suppose, in his
preparations for to-morrow. But then he has servants. Does the man think
he is so secure of me, that having appointed, he need not give himself
any further concern about me till the very moment? He knows how I am
beset. He knows not what may happen. I may be ill, or still more closely
watched or confined than before. The correspondence might be discovered.
It might be necessary to vary the scheme. I might be forced into
measures, which might entirely frustrate my purpose. I might have new
doubts. I might suggest something more convenient, for any thing he
knew. What can the man mean, I wonder!--Yet it shall lie; for if he has
it any time before the appointed hour, it will save me declaring to him
personally my changed purpose, and the trouble of contending with him on
that score. If he send for it at all, he will see by the date, that he
might have had it in time; and if he be put to any inconvenience from
shortness of notice, let him take it for his pains.


SUNDAY NIGHT, NINE O'CLOCK.

It is determined, it seems, to send for Mrs. Norton to be here on
Tuesday to dinner; and she is to stay with me for a whole week.

So she is first to endeavour to persuade me to comply; and, when the
violence is done, she is to comfort me, and try to reconcile me to
my fate. They expect fits and fetches, Betty insolently tells me, and
expostulations, and exclamations, without number: but every body will
be prepared for them: and when it's over, it's over; and I shall be easy
and pacified when I find I can't help it.


MONDAY MORN. APRIL 10, SEVEN O'CLOCK.

O my dear! there yet lies the letter, just as I left it!

Does he think he is so sure of me?--Perhaps he imagines that I dare not
alter my purpose. I wish I had never known him! I begin now to see this
rashness in the light every one else would have seen it in, had I been
guilty of it. But what can I do, if he come to-day at the appointed
time! If he receive not the letter, I must see him, or he will think
something has befallen me; and certainly will come to the house. As
certainly he will be insulted. And what, in that case, may be the
consequence! Then I as good as promised that I would take the first
opportunity to see him, if I change my mind, and to give him my reasons
for it. I have no doubt but he will be out of humour upon it: but
better, if we meet, that he should go away dissatisfied with me, than
that I should go away dissatisfied with myself.

Yet, short as the time is, he may still perhaps send, and get the
letter. Something may have happened to prevent him, which when known
will excuse him.

After I have disappointed him more than once before, on a requested
interview only, it is impossible he should not have a curiosity at
least, to know if something has not happened; and whether my mind hold
or not in this more important case. And yet, as I rashly confirmed my
resolution by a second letter, I begin now to doubt it.


NINE O'CLOCK.

My cousin Dolly Hervey slid the enclosed letter into my hand, as I
passed by her, coming out of the garden.


DEAREST MADAM,

I have got intelligence from one who pretends to know every thing,
that you must be married on Wednesday morning to Mr. Solmes. Perhaps,
however, she says this only to vex me; for it is that saucy creature
Betty Barnes. A license is got, as she says: and so far she went as to
tell me (bidding me say nothing, but she knew I would) that Mr. Brand is
to marry you. For Dr. Lewen I hear, refuses, unless your consent can
be obtained; and they have heard that he does not approve of their
proceedings against you. Mr. Brand, I am told, is to have his fortune
made by uncle Harlowe and among them.

You will know better than I what to make of all these matters; for
sometimes I think Betty tells me things as if I should not tell you,
and yet expects that I will.* For there is great whispering between Miss
Harlowe and her; and I have observed that when their whispering is over,
Betty comes and tells me something by way of secret. She and all the
world know how much I love you: and so I would have them. It is an
honour to me to love a young lady who is and ever was an honour to all
her family, let them say what they will.


     * It is easy for such of the readers as have been attentive
     to Mr. Lovelace's manner of working, to suppose, from this
     hint of Miss Hervey's, that he had instructed his double-
     faced agent to put his sweet-heart Betty upon alarming Miss
     Hervey, in hopes she would alarm her beloved cousin, (as we
     see she does,) in order to keep her steady to her
     appointment with him.


But from a more certain authority than Betty's I can assure you (but I
must beg of you to burn this letter) that you are to be searched
once more for letters, and for pen and ink; for they know you write.
Something they pretend to have come at from one of Mr. Lovelace's
servants, which they hope to make something of. I know not for certain
what it is. He must be a very vile and wicked man who would boast of a
lady's favour to him, and reveal secrets. But Mr. Lovelace, I dare say,
is too much of a gentleman to be guilty of such ingratitude.

Then they have a notion, from that false Betty I believe, that you
intend to take something to make yourself sick; and so they will search
for phials and powders and such like.

If nothing shall be found that will increase their suspicions, you are
to be used more kindly by your papa when you appear before them all,
than he of late has used you.

Yet, sick or well, alas! my dear cousin! you must be married. But your
husband is to go home every night without you, till you are reconciled
to him. And so illness can be no pretence to save you.

They are sure you will make a good wife. So would not I, unless I liked
my husband. And Mr. Solmes is always telling them how he will purchase
your love by rich presents.--A syncophant man!--I wish he and Betty
Barnes were to come together; and he would beat her every day.

After what I told you, I need not advise you to secure every thing you
would not have seen.

Once more let me beg that you will burn this letter; and, pray, dearest
Madam, do not take any thing that may prejudice your health: for that
will not do. I am

Your truly loving cousin, D.H.


*****


When I first read my cousin's letter, I was half inclined to resume my
former intention; especially as my countermanding letter was not taken
away; and as my heart ached at the thoughts of the conflict I must
expect to have with him on my refusal. For see him for a few moments I
doubt I must, lest he should take some rash resolutions; especially as
he has reason to expect I will see him. But here your words, that all
punctilio is at an end the moment I am out of my father's house,
added to the still more cogent considerations of duty and reputation,
determined me once more against the rash step. And it will be very hard
(although no seasonable fainting, or wished-for fit, should stand my
friend) if I cannot gain one month, or fortnight, or week. And I have
still more hopes that I shall prevail for some delay, from my cousin's
intimation that the good Dr. Lewen refuses to give his assistance to
their projects, if they have not my consent, and thinks me cruelly used:
since, without taking notice that I am apprized of this, I can plead
a scruple of conscience, and insist upon having that worthy divine's
opinion upon it: in which, enforced as I shall enforce it, my mother
will surely second me: my aunt Hervey, and Mrs. Norton, will support
her: the suspension must follow: and I can but get away afterwards.

But, if they will compel me: if they will give me no time: if nobody
will be moved: if it be resolved that the ceremony should be read over
my constrained hand--why then--Alas! What then!--I can but--But what? O
my dear! this Solmes shall never have my vows I am resolved! and I will
say nothing but no, as long as I shall be able to speak. And who will
presume to look upon such an act of violence as a marriage?--It is
impossible, surely, that a father and mother can see such a dreadful
compulsion offered to their child--but if mine should withdraw, and
leave the task to my brother and sister, they will have no mercy.

I am grieved to be driven to have recourse to the following artifices.

I have given them a clue, by the feather of a pen sticking out, where
they will find such of my hidden stories, as I intend they shall find.

Two or three little essays I have left easy to be seen, of my own
writing.

About a dozen lines also of a letter begun to you, in which I express
my hopes, (although I say that appearances are against me,) and that
my friends will relent. They know from your mother, by my uncle Antony,
that, some how or other, I now and then get a letter to you. In this
piece of a letter I declare renewedly my firm resolution to give up the
man so obnoxious to my family, on their releasing me from the address of
the other.

Near the essays, I have left the copy of my letter to Lady Drayton;*
which affording arguments suitable to my case, may chance (thus
accidentally to be fallen upon) to incline them to favour me.


     * See Letters XIII. and XIV.


I have reserves of pens and ink, you may believe; and one or two in the
ivy summer-house; with which I shall amuse myself, in order to lighten,
if possible, those apprehensions which more and more affect me, as
Wednesday, the day of trial, approaches.




LETTER XLVII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE IVY SUMMER-HOUSE, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

He has not yet got my letter: and while I was contriving here how to
send my officious gaoleress from me, that I might have time for the
intended interview, and had hit upon an expedient, which I believe would
have done, came my aunt, and furnished me with a much better. She saw my
little table covered, preparative to my solitary dinner; and hoped,
she told me, that this would be the last day that my friends would be
deprived of my company at table.

You may believe, my dear, that the thoughts of meeting Mr. Lovelace,
for fear of being discovered, together with the contents of my cousin
Dolly's letter, gave me great and visible emotions. She took notice of
them--Why these sighs, why these heavings here? said she, patting my
neck--O my dear Niece, who would have thought so much natural sweetness
could be so very unpersuadable?

I could not answer her, and she proceeded--I am come, I doubt, upon a
very unwelcome errand. Some things have been told us yesterday, which
came from the mouth of one of the most desperate and insolent men in the
world, convince your father, and all of us, that you still find means
to write out of the house. Mr. Lovelace knows every thing that is done
here; and that as soon as done; and great mischief is apprehended from
him, which you are as much concerned as any body to prevent. Your mother
has also some apprehensions concerning yourself, which yet she hopes are
groundless; but, however, cannot be easy, if she would, unless (while
you remain here in the garden, or in this summer-house) you give her
the opportunity once more of looking into your closet, your cabinet and
drawers. It will be the better taken, if you give me cheerfully your
keys. I hope, my dear, you won't dispute it. Your desire of dining in
this place was the more readily complied with for the sake of such an
opportunity.

I thought myself very lucky to be so well prepared by my cousin Dolly's
means for this search: but yet I artfully made some scruples, and not a
few complaints of this treatment: after which, I not only gave her the
keys of all, but even officiously emptied my pockets before her, and
invited her to put her fingers in my stays, that she might be sure I had
no papers there.

This highly obliged her; and she said, she would represent my cheerful
compliance as it deserved, let my brother and sister say what they
would. My mother in particular, she was sure, would rejoice at the
opportunity given her to obviate, as she doubted not would be the case,
some suspicions that were raised against me.

She then hinted, That there were methods taken to come at all Mr.
Lovelace's secrets, and even, from his careless communicativeness, at
some secret of mine; it being, she said, his custom, boastingly to prate
to his very servants of his intentions, in particular cases. She added,
that deep as he was thought to be, my brother was as deep as he, and
fairly too hard for him at his own weapons--as one day it would be
found.

I knew not, I said, the meaning of these dark hints. I thought the
cunning she hinted at, on both sides, called rather for contempt than
applause. I myself might have been put upon artifices which my heart
disdained to practise, had I given way to the resentment, which, I was
bold to say, was much more justifiable than the actions that occasioned
it: that it was evident to me, from what she had said, that their
present suspicions of me were partly owing to this supposed superior
cunning of my brother, and partly to the consciousness that the usage I
met with might naturally produce a reason for such suspicions: that it
was very unhappy for me to be made the butt of my brother's wit: that it
would have been more to his praise to have aimed at shewing a kind heart
than a cunning head: that, nevertheless, I wished he knew himself as
well as I imagined I knew him; and he would then have less conceit of
his abilities: which abilities would, in my opinion, be less thought of,
if his power to do ill offices were not much greater than they.

I was vexed. I could not help making this reflection. The dupe the
other, too probably, makes of him, through his own spy, deserved it. But
I so little approve of this low art in either, that were I but tolerably
used, the vileness of that man, that Joseph Leman, should be inquired
into.

She was sorry, she said, to find that I thought so disparagingly of my
brother. He was a young man both of learning and parts.

Learning enough, I said, to make him vain of it among us women: but not
of parts sufficient to make his learning valuable either to himself or
to any body else.

She wished, indeed, that he had more good nature: but she feared that
I had too great an opinion of somebody else, to think so well of my
brother as a sister ought: since, between the two, there was a sort of
rivalry, as to abilities, that made them hate one another.

Rivalry! Madam, said I.--If that be the case, or whether it be or not,
I wish they both understood, better than either of them seem to do,
what it becomes gentlemen, and men of liberal education, to be, and to
do.--Neither of them, then, would glory in what they ought to be ashamed
of.

But waving this subject, it was not impossible, I said, that they might
find a little of my writing, and a pen or two, and a little ink, [hated
art!--or rather, hateful the necessity for it!] as I was not permitted
to go up to put them out of the way: but if they did, I must be
contented. And I assured her, that, take what time they pleased, I would
not go in to disturb them, but would be either in or near the garden,
in this summer-house, or in the cedar one, or about my poultry-yard, or
near the great cascade, till I was ordered to return to my prison. With
like cunning I said, I supposed the unkind search would not be made
till the servants had dined; because I doubted not that the pert Betty
Barnes, who knew all the corners of my apartment and closet, would be
employed in it.

She hoped, she said, that nothing could be found that would give a
handle against me: for, she would assure me, the motives to the search,
on my mother's part especially, were, that she hoped to find reason
rather to acquit than to blame me; and that my father might be induced
to see my to-morrow night, or Wednesday morning, with temper: with
tenderness, I should rather say, said she; for he is resolved to do so,
if no new offence be given.

Ah! Madam, said I--

Why that Ah! Madam, and shaking your head so significantly?

I wish, Madam, that I may not have more reason to dread my father's
continued displeasure, than to hope for his returning tenderness.

You don't know, my dear!--Things may take a turn--things may not be so
bad as you fear--

Dearest Madam, have you any consolation to give me?--

Why, my dear, it is possible, that you may be more compliable than you
have been.

Why raised you my hopes, Madam?--Don't let me think my dear aunt Hervey
cruel to a niece who truly honours her.

I may tell you more perhaps, said she (but in confidence, absolute
confidence) if the inquiry within came out in your favour. Do you know
of any thin above that can be found to your disadvantage?--

Some papers they will find, I doubt: but I must take consequences.
My brother and sister will be at hand with their good-natured
constructions. I am made desperate, and care not what is found.

I hope, I earnestly hope, that nothing can be found that will impeach
your discretion; and then--but I may say too much--

And away she went, having added to my perplexity.

But I now can think of nothing but this interview.--Would to Heaven it
were over!--To meet to quarrel--but, let him take what measures he will,
I will not stay a moment with him, if he be not quite calm and resigned.

Don't you see how crooked some of my lines are? Don't you see how some
of the letters stagger more than others?--That is when this interview is
more in my head than in my subject.

But, after all, should I, ought I to meet him? How have I taken it for
granted that I should!--I wish there were time to take your advice. Yet
you are so loth to speak quite out--but that I owe, as you own, to the
difficulty of my situation.

I should have mentioned, that in the course of this conversation I
besought my aunt to stand my friend, and to put in a word for me on
my approaching trial; and to endeavour to procure me time for
consideration, if I could obtain nothing else.

She told me, that, after the ceremony was performed [odious confirmation
of a hint in my cousin Dolly's letter!] I should have what time I
pleased to reconcile myself to my lot before cohabitation.

This put me out of all patience.

She requested of me in her turn, she said, that I would resolve to meet
them all with cheerful duty, and with a spirit of absolute acquiescence.
It was in my power to make them all happy. And how joyful would it be
to her, she said, to see my father, my mother, my uncles, my brother, my
sister, all embracing me with raptures, and folding me in turns to their
fond hearts, and congratulating each other on their restored happiness!
Her own joy, she said, would probably make her motionless and speechless
for a time: and for her Dolly--the poor girl, who had suffered in the
esteem of some, for her grateful attachment to me, would have every body
love her again.

Will you doubt, my dear, that my next trial will be the most affecting
that I have yet had?

My aunt set forth all this in so strong a light, and I was so
particularly touched on my cousin Dolly's account, that, impatient as I
was just before, I was greatly moved: yet could only shew, by my sighs
and my tears, how desirable such an event would be to me, could it
be brought about upon conditions with which it was possible for me to
comply.

Here comes Betty Barnes with my dinner--


*****


The wench is gone. The time of meeting is at hand. O that he may not
come!--But should I, or should I not, meet him?--How I question, without
possibility of a timely answer!

Betty, according to my leading hint to my aunt, boasted to me, that she
was to be employed, as she called it, after she had eat her own dinner.

She should be sorry, she told me, to have me found out. Yet 'twould be
all for my good. I should have it in my power to be forgiven for all at
once, before Wednesday night. The confident creature then, to stifle a
laugh, put a corner of her apron in her mouth, and went to the door:
and on her return to take away, as I angrily bid her, she begged my
excuse--but--but--and then the saucy creature laughed again, she could
not help it, to think how I had drawn myself in by my summer-house
dinnering, since it had given so fine an opportunity, by way of
surprise, to look into all my private hoards. She thought something was
in the wind, when my brother came into my dining here so readily. Her
young master was too hard for every body. 'Squire Lovelace himself was
nothing at all at a quick thought to her young master.

My aunt mentioned Mr. Lovelace's boasting behaviour to his servants:
perhaps he may be so mean. But as to my brother, he always took a pride
in making himself appear to be a man of parts and learning to our
own servants. Pride and meanness, I have often thought, are as nearly
allied, and as close borderers upon each other, as the poet tells us wit
and madness are.

But why do I trouble you (and myself, at such a crisis) with these
impertinences?--Yet I would forget, if I could, the nearest evil, the
interview; because, my apprehensions increasing as the hour is at hand,
I should, were my intentions to be engrossed by them, be unfit to see
him, if he does come: and then he will have too much advantage over me,
as he will have seeming reason to reproach me with change of resolution.

The upbraider, you know, my dear, is in some sense a superior; while the
upbraided, if with reason upbraided, must make a figure as spiritless as
conscious.

I know that this wretch will, if he can, be his own judge, and mine too.
But the latter he shall not be.

I dare say, we shall be all to pieces. But I don't care for that. It
would be hard, if I, who have held it out so sturdily to my father and
uncles, should not--but he is at the garden-door--


*****


I was mistaken!--How many noises unlike, be made like to what one
fears!--Why flutters the fool so--!


*****


I will hasten to deposit this. Then I will, for the last time, go to the
usual place, in hopes to find that he has got my letter. If he has, I
will not meet him. If he has not, I will take it back, and shew him what
I have written. That will break the ice, as I may say, and save me much
circumlocution and reasoning: and a steady adherence to that my written
mind is all that will be necessary.--The interview must be as short as
possible; for should it be discovered, it would furnish a new and strong
pretence for the intended evil of Wednesday next.

Perhaps I shall not be able to write again one while. Perhaps not till
I am the miserable property of that Solmes!--But that shall never, never
be, while I have my senses.

If your servant find nothing from me by Wednesday morning, you may then
conclude that I can neither write to you, nor receive your favours.

In that case, pity and pray for me, my beloved friend; and continue to
me that place in your affection, which is the pride of my life, and the
only comfort left to

Your CL. HARLOWE.




LETTER XLVIII

MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO MISS HOWE ST. ALBAN'S, TUESDAY MORN. PAST ONE.


O MY DEAREST FRIEND!

After what I had resolved upon, as by my former, what shall I write?
what can I? with what consciousness, even by letter, do I approach
you?--You will soon hear (if already you have not heard from the mouth
of common fame) that your Clarissa Harlowe is gone off with a man!

I am busying myself to give you the particulars at large. The whole
twenty-four hours of each day (to begin at the moment I can fix) shall
be employed in it till it is finished: every one of the hours, I mean,
that will be spared me by this interrupting man, to whom I have made
myself so foolishly accountable for too many of them. Rest is departed
from me. I have no call for that: and that has no balm for the wounds
of my mind. So you'll have all those hours without interruption till the
account is ended.

But will you receive, shall you be permitted to receive my letters,
after what I have done?

O my dearest friend!--But I must make the best of it.

I hope that will not be very bad! yet am I convinced that I did a rash
and inexcusable thing in meeting him; and all his tenderness, all his
vows, cannot pacify my inward reproaches on that account.

The bearer comes to you, my dear, for the little parcel of linen which I
sent you with far better and more agreeable hopes.

Send not my letters. Send the linen only: except you will favour me with
one line, to tell me you love me still; and that you will suspend your
censures till you have the whole before you. I am the readier to send
thus early, because if you have deposited any thing for me, you may
cause it to be taken back, or withhold any thing you had but intended to
send.

Adieu, my dearest friend!--I beseech you to love me still--But
alas! what will your mother say?--what will mine?--what my other
relations?--and what my dear Mrs. Norton?--and how will my brother and
sister triumph!

I cannot at present tell you how, or where, you can direct to me. For
very early shall I leave this place; harassed and fatigued to death.
But, when I can do nothing else, constant use has made me able to write.
Long, very long, has been all my amusement and pleasure: yet could not
that have been such to me, had I not had you, my best beloved friend, to
write to. Once more adieu. Pity and pray for

Your CL. HARLOWE.

END OF VOL. II

